Title: Derbyshire II
Date: 2005-01-28
Location: derbyshire
Summary:<p>Obscenely warm, pleasant + enjoyable weekend - couldn't quite believe we were in Derbyshire!</p><br><p>Four stonkingly good trips, a mountainous curry to consume on Saturday and pints of tea with Jaffa Cakes all round; an IC trip to Derbyshire that didn't go horribly wrong! In some way I'm shocked and appalled...</p><br><p>Trip reports to come once the logbook is typed up + I blackmail freshers into writing the other ones...</p><p><i>[Dear Doctor, I did not go caving at the weekend against your instructions. Especially not in walking boots and a Duffel coat, like <a href="photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0161.html">this</a>. Caving without proper safety equipment, lighting or a hard hat would be dangerous and just plain silly. Yours, Jarvist.]</i></p>
Type: trip
Photoarchive:/rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/
Mainimg: IMG_0168.JPG
Thumbl: IMG_0116--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: IMG_0163--thumb.jpg
Authors: Jo King, Darryl Anderson, Sandeep Mavadia, Sarah Arctic
Cavepeeps: DATE=2005-01-29; CAVE=Giant's Hole; PEOPLE=Darryl Anderson, Clewin Griffiths, Sarah Arctic, Nava Schwarzgold, Jarvist Frost;
           DATE=2005-01-29; CAVE=James Hall; PEOPLE=Chris Rogers, Pip Crosby, Dan Greenwald, Jo King, Sandeep Mavadia;
           DATE=2005-01-30; CAVE=Giant's Hole; PEOPLE=Darryl Anderson, Chris Rogers, Sarah Arctic, Nava Schwarzgold;
	   DATE=2005-01-30; CAVE=Nettle Pot; PEOPLE=Clewin Griffiths, Dan Greenwald, Jo King, Sandeep Mavadia;
Oldurl:/caving/derbyshire/derbyshire-2005-01-28.php

### Clewin Griffith [O.L.D.], Joanna King [D.], Darryl Anderson [O.L.], Chris Rogers [O.L.], Pip Crosby [O.L.], Sarah Johnson (Arctic), Sandeep Mavadia, Dan Greenwald, Jarvist Frost [_Injured_], Nava Schwarzgold, Dave.

{{ mainimg }}

### [Left to right] Sarah Arctic, Darryl, Dave, Clewin, Nava; in Giants.

* * *

## Saturday

### Giants: Darryl, Clew, Sarah Arctic, Nava, Dave, _Jarvist_

Right, as it was my first caving trip for ten months, I decided that it must
be down this cave. It also coincided with 2 freshers needing to be 'broken in'
on this trip. Perfect!

That's what I thought anyway.

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0116--thumb.jpg) 
{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0119--thumb.jpg) 

Halfway through changing out of the back of
the Minibus next to the trespass fee place for Giants, Clewin mentioned to me
"I might go out early if I get cold...". That meant that I would be left
leading the three tiny-tots along the round trip on my own with a dodgy
shoulder IF CLEWIN GOT COLD! So naturally, this being Clewin the experienced
Alpine exedition caver, I said "What?!". It'd turned out that he'd given his
oversuit to a fresher [who managed to pack the smallest oversuit in stores -
5-foot Jo managed to squeeze into it on the Mendips trip with a fair bit of
assistance, but was left with rather restricted mobility and a skin-tight
fit], so would be caving in a bare Neofleece. Ok; could still be dealt with.
Then I thought... Bugger. I didn't grab a spread from stores for the ladder...
but a string of krabs will do. However, I then discovered that someone had
taken the ladder out of the minibus the night before, and that it was almost
certainly keeping itself warm in front of the fire at the Orpheus. Bang goes
the round trip, so what else was there to do? [Considering we'd already paid
our shocking 2-quid Trespass fees!]

Surprisingly, there was more than I expected...

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0155--thumb.jpg) 
{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0163--thumb.jpg) 

We went into Giants Hole, five in caving
kit, and Jarvist (who wanted to see the real Giants entrance) in Dufel coat,
cords and walking boots. Jarvist joined us until Waterfall Chamber, where we
went to Garlands Pot and the crawl opposite. Sarah Arctic seemed to take a
shine to climbing until meeting a shear calcite wall (fair do's), but Clewin
had a go for 2 metres. That was all. We headed back to Waterfall Chamber, with
myself trying a climb on the way (NOT comfortable!). From there, Clewin, Sarah
and myself climbed upstream (similar to the Crabwalk) until the boulder choke,
where we turned around and climbed up into the upper series and the nice
traverses up there. Passed a couple of other cavers and found a hole down to
Waterfall Chamber, but wisely backed up and climbed down a rift to meet Nava,
Dave and Jarvist. We then headed out of the cave, a trip from which I expected
less than I got!

####Darryl Anderson

### JH: Chris, Pip, Dan, Jo, Sandeep

Following my last caving attempts in two left wellies, I concentrated really
hard at selecting kit this weekend. Only mistake this time was thinking a
dinky elbow pad would work a knee pad. Hmm... Anyhow, (as Sandeep has
mentioned) I was persuaded into thinking a 90m trip down J.H&gt; was what I
fancied doing. Well, maybe not <s>fancied</s> doing, but I thought it sounded
more doable than the initial -200m suggestion. Frist pitch we all sped happily
down, first time I've noticed my descender get hot! Pip went on ahead to rig
the second pitch whilst the rest of us followed on behind. During this brief
respite, I had enough time to scare myself into thinking that the first pitch
was quite long enough and that I'd never be able to reach surface again if I
went much further down (Hey! I'm a feeble _fresher_, I'm allowed such
thoughts!). Sandeep and I both decided to abort + head out.

####Jo King

[Ed: _ Chris and Pip continued down the next pitch; had a look around, and
with beautiful timing; came flying out of the entrance with their nitro-
assisted footjamming speed just in time to hand over some of the tacklebags to
the lethargic freshers. Out in time for sunset, then back to the Orpheus to
help with the curry._]

Pip said it [Ed: Some kind of pretty mineral deposit...] was the only placce
in the world where it could be found. The traverses as far as Bitch Pitch was
beautiful, over crystal clear water which went down and down! I couldn't do
the traverse over the top of [aptly named] Bitch Pitch, and so caught up with
Jo + Dan to follow them out. A pity, I should have just trusted the rope and
dangled over - Chris and Pip said the bottom was really nice. So we all ended
up out in record time, a good Omen for Grenoble!

####Sandeep 'Stan' Mavadia

* * *

## Sunday

### Giants take 2: Darryl, Chris, Sarah Arctic, Nava, Dave

Equipped with the ladder this time, we piled out of the minibus at the farm
into a delightfully icy wind and trundled back off to the cave entrance, to
find that Dave's light didn't work. After some quick thinking handy work from
Daryl we were back on track with 5 illuminated torches, and all bombed down
the ladder. At this point Daryl pointed out that there was a way of getting
down by placing a handline, so actually we could have done the cave yesterday
as we had a rope with us...

Onwards twisting up, down and round the crab walk, through the vice and
surprisingly quickly we were at the half way point. A short walk down a
passageway took us to the connection to oxtale (?) - a long, horrible tight
crawl feet first on your back apparently.. so we swiftly turned back and began
the second half of the round trip! Everything was a more open on the way back
as we moved over the top of the crab walk. There were a couple of climbs using
handlines, and, delightfully, a considerable belly crawl through muddy water
which involved a few worrying moments of having to move your head into a
position sideways enough to breathe, yet forwards enough to see where to go...
Crawling through chocolate I told myself, pleasant, warm, hot chocolate...

Next was traversing, which aside from the 70ft drop I quite enjoyed, until we
came to the last part. Here the ledges sort of ran out, so you had to kinda
wedge yourself and lower yourself down and across to the edge, in that
effortless seeming way cavers do, all the while over the 70ft drop. Not my
strong point, Dave mentioned that he found vertigo in the cave much more of a
problem than claustraphobia, and it strikes me that this is bizarrely very
true. Anyways, in my efforts to remain wedged I moved far too close to the top
and ended up relatively stuck to the ceiling, my exit was via pretty much
kicking and then standing on Daryl's head, he was very good about this. Next
was an equally interesting sideways crawl through the eye hole, which was easy
once you believed you wouldn't fall down the big hole. I find it surprising
how often caving is more of a psychological than a physical battle. We were
all still soaked to the skin from the crawl at this point, and with Dave and I
taking some time over these bits we were all rather cold from waiting. Luckily
Nava sped through and we got off moving for more traversing and a climb down
before re-climbing the ladder and seeing the end in sight! Luckily we exited
the cave safely with all arms and legs in tact as there was not even a hint of
the strange duffel coated monster we had met the previous day.

Like clockwork the minibus was driving down the road to us as we walked back
up to the farm, and we were whisked back to the cave hut in true chauffeur
style to very tasty cheese-and-a-variety-of-fillings sandwiches (thanks Jarv)
- just what the doctor ordered before our return to bonny home!

Many thanks to all for your fresher patience, and particularly to the drivers
for dropping Sarah Arctic in Oxford.

####Sarah Arctic

### Nettle Pot: Clewin, Dan, Jo, Sandeep

We set off with a purposeful stride which rapidly changed into a searching
meander once we realised that no-one actually knew where we were going. After
much peering into any likely dip on the way, Clewin thankfully bumped into the
entrance hole at the top of the hill.

Dan rigged the first pitch with a reassuring "I've never done this before"
whilst the rest of us all huddled out of the wind just inside the entrance. We
descended as far as Grand Canyon before doing a sharp about-turn and heading
back. The tight pitch made it slightly slow going but the top appeared
surprisingly quickly (in my view anyhow, - I'm sure for those waiting it
wasn't so rapid..!) I was first up and so, whilst waiting, I amused myself by
trying to retrieve my gloves from somewhere down the back of my oversuit. This
involved various contortions and finally proved to be a two man operation once
Sandeep arrived to aide and abet.

We emerged from the cave to "a delightfully invigorating breeze" (A slight
translation of Dan's words there) and with perfect timing we managed to return
to Giants in coordination with the return of the other group.

####Jo King

* * *

[Photoss](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-01-28%20-%20derbyshire%20-%20jarvist/dirindex.html) [mainly Giants on Saturday].

