Title: New Zealand Rocks!
Date: 2015-03-18
Location: New Zealand
Summary: Our resident geologist, Tanguy Racine, sates our apatite for sedimentary reasoning, with this deposition on New Zealand's faults, marbelous formations and other boulder topics.
Photoarchive: ../photo_archive/newzealand/2015-03-18%20-%20NZ%20Rocks
Author: Tanguy Racine

Little is known about the geological history of New Zealand beyond the early Palaeozoic era (more than 541 My ago).  There are no precambrian rock outcrops in continental New Zealand, but luckily the oldest rocks outcrop in the Nelson area, in the Buller and Takaka terranes (fragments of continental crust accreted to another region of continent, and bounded by major faults).

{"Figure 1: Map of the Western Province Terranes" center}("terrane.jpg")

Mount Owen, at which Arthur marble outcrops is situated at the southern tip of the Takaka terrane. The slice is bounded to the west by the major Anatoki thrust fault, which separates it from the Buller terrane.

{"Figure 2: Simplified chronology of terrane accretion" right}("chronology.jpg")

The Takaka terrane is comprised of different entities of which the Arthur group is of interest. After the Devil’s River volcanics were emplaced  in an island arc setting of the coast of Gondwana (a giant mass made of modern Africa, India, Australia, Southern America and Antarctica) in the Cambrian, massive limestones were deposited on the shallow fringes of the arc from the middle Ordovician to the beginning of the Silurian. In the deeper parts of the basin between the Takaka terrane and mainland Gondwana, argillites (or clay-rich sequences of rocks) were deposited.

Afterwards, Buller and Takaka were brought together, and both moved towards mainland Gondwana, which during the early Jurrassic became Pangea. At the break up of Pangea in the mid Jurassic, the Zealandia continent stayed with Australia and Antarctica until the three eventually broke up. Australia moved north at a rapid pace, while the microcontinent Zealandia, moved east.

{"" center}("tectono.png")

Now, only 7% of the Zealandia continent sits above sea level, in the form of the North and South Islands plus minor archipelagos. The continent sits astride a major plate boundary, the Alpine fault, which separates the Indo-Australian plate from the Pacific plate. It is active today and responsible for the surrection of the Southern Alps. The rapid uplift recorded on the west of the major fault means that old rocks, deep in the earth’ crust will eventually crop at the surface.

{"Figure 4: The continent configuration in the Cambrian period" left}("cambrian.jpg")

The limestones of Mount Owen have thus seen a long and varied geological history. They have been deformed by the terrane accretion and thrust faulting, and the igneous intrusions nearby. The excessive heat and pressure have permitted the recrystallisation of calcite, the development of fabrics that metamorphosed the limestone into marble, and argillite deposits nearby into schists. At least three distinct, successive episodes of folding can be recognised for the study of microscopic fabrics, the latest of which has resulted in the surrection of the Southern Alps and Marino mountains, to which Mount Owen appertains.

Now this is well and good, but not very useful to the Homo Speleo Vulgarus. What will the marble look like on the field? It is dark and massive. The relic bedding is sometimes seen as a light/dark alternation, but the subsequent metamorphic fabrics are superimposed, often at an angle. The distinctive feature is the karstic landscape. On mount Owen, east of the Nuggety creek source is a conformable contact with the Wangapeka formation, another upper Ordovician metamorphic rock, which is composed of argillites, dark shales, and rare lenses of dark marble. No caves there!

####Tanguy Racine

<!---
delete this before posting because it will appear as a html comment

METADATA:

Title: Title of the trip, i.e Wales III or Yorkshire IV or France

Date: Date in YYYY-MM-DD format

Location: Location of trip i.e Yorkshire, Wales, or France

Summary: The short blurb that will appear on the main page

Photoarchive: Delete for no photo archive, leave blank for autogenerated location (will not work for NZ subsite), or type a custom path for the archive (../photo_archive/newzealand/YYYY-MM-DD%20-%20Placename). You will have to make this folder and populate it yourself.

Mainimg: filename including extension of image in photoarchive folder to display in the article, leave blank for no image.

Thumbl: filename including extension of image in photoarchive folder to display as the left thumbnail on the main index page

Thumbr: same but the right thumbnail

Author: The authors of the article, seperated by commas e.g. "Stores Gnomes, Stores Mice"

Status: Set this to "draft" if you don't want it to appear on the site yet or delete entirely if you do

OTHER STUFF:

There is a plugin active to allow easy inline posting of images. Similar to the way links work in standard markdown:
{"Caption Goes Here Or Not" left}("filename.jpg")
Within the curly braces on the left there is a caption in quotes, this is optional. There is also an alignment (left) on the right which can be left/right/center. In the round braces on the right is the url in quotes of the image. This will link to photos in the specified photoarchive (i.e just use the filename!).
If you want to link to images outside of the photoarchive then put an exclamation mark after the first curly brace:
{!"Caption Goes Here Or Not" left}("www.external.com/image.jpg")

delete this before posting because it will appear as a html comment
--->
