Title: Ed's Cellar 2: Electric Boogaloo
Date: 2015-04-10
Location: Harwood's Hole Campsite, Takaka
Summary: Eds cellar is the target of the cavers attention this time. Braving the rain, terryfying rigging, and doubtful leads the team pushes on.
Author: Jack Hare

( This was transcribed by JMF at 23:40 BST, so 10:40 NZ time tomorrow 2015-04-11, 
from a fairly broken GSM phone call around the
world (which soon got dropped), and then a Google chat from Jack's Android phone! 
Any errors or omissions are almostly certainly lost in circumnavigation. )

The weather is still really poor, the rest have gone caving... I thought I'd
give you a ring.

We are camping near the carpark for
Hardwood hole, a cave with an impressive 200 m entrance pitch about 40 minutes
walk away, a very popular tourist spot as it is a huge open pitch. So loads of
hikers turn up in battered vehicles.

The carpark has drop toilets and taps for water (though we purify it). 

We are pushing leads in Ed's Cellar in Takaka hill, a highly vertical (SRT)
cave.
Last surveyed 1962, we've got a going lead at the bottom of some tight pitches
with flowstone blocking a rift.

So Rhys, Chris and Tanguy have gone to push it today. 
With James, Cecilia and Alex resurveying behind them as the 1962 survey left no
PSS to branch off.

Kiwis favour naturals and terrifying free climbs but we bolted some stuff. One
lovely 30 m pitch free hang, then some tighter ones over loose rock faces. The
new pitch is 20 m.

Tanguy and I drew up the survey by hand last night, we had surveyed 160m of
passage to a depth of 80m.

Beautiful dark marble with calcite infilled fractures, very loose rock.
And razor sharp!

Glorious sunshine yesterday dried everything out and we have three tarps to
make a great bivi.
Thick mist today, but not heavy rain.

We have spotted a break in the weather early next week and are consulting with
Kieran as to whether we can fly up Mt Owen then. If not, we'll probably stay in
the present vicinity, there's loads of new exploration potential.

Right, we should get back to camp to make sure everything goes smoothly. If you
can turn any of this into an update for the website that'd be swell.

###Jack Hare, misquoted by Jarvist Moore Frost
