Title: Asiago
Date: 2008-06-13
Location: italy
Summary: Amazing long weekend in Italy, hospitality by the Kirkpatrick family in the beautiful Asiago (a plateau surrounded by a ring of cavernous peaks), leadership courtesy of the Italian cavers Luca and Massimo (sic.). Was lovely to be back in the cool welcome of an alpine system! Bounced to ~300+m on the Saturday trip and an easy ~200m+ on the Sunday, before driving to Padova to be fed, watered and housed by the Kirkpatricks once more before an early morning flight home.
Type: trip
Photoarchive: /rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/italy%20-%202008-06-13/
Mainimg: jarvist%20frost%20-abisso%20spiller%20-group%20shot%20minus%20250m.jpg
Thumbl: jarvist%20frost%20-%20abisso%20est%20-fratnik%20descending%20first%20pitch1--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: jarvist%20frost%20-%20abisso%20est%20-y%20hang%20fourth%20pitch--thumb.jpg
Authors: Jarvist Frost
Cavepeeps: DATE=2008-06-14; CAVE=Abisso Spiller; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, James Kirkpatrick, Jana Carga, Izi, Fratnik;
     DATE=2008-06-15; CAVE=Abisso Est; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, James Kirkpatrick, Jana Carga, Izi, Fratnik;
Oldurl: /rcc/caving/wiki.php?n=Trip.Italy-2008-06-13
Status:

{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}
#####{{ allpeople }}

### Asiago Long Weekend

### The Team

*   Massimo (Gruppo Grotte Valdagno)
*   Luca (Gruppo Grotte Valdagno)
*   Fratnik (JSPDT)
*   Izy / Iztok (JSPDT)
*   Jana (JSPDT/ICCC)
*   Jarv (ICCC)
*   James KP (ICCC)

### Saturday: Abisso Spiller

Entrance of the cave in a conifer forest at ~1800 near Monte Verena. A 65 m pit is followed by a narrow meander with some small jumps. More pits (one of which beautifully decorated) lead to a rift/boulder choke with eventually leads to a homely underground camp (with telephone on a rock!), more meander and more pits.

Caved to -300m+, mostly perm. rigged. Passed UG Bivi / end of telephone wire at ~-300m. Silly Jarv instigated came of hunt the Englishman on way out. Card games & goodbye to Luca.

### Sunday: Abisso Est

Caved to ~200m ? 95m entrance drop, we took sidechambers via approx. 2 x 50m pitches. Some nice photos. A while to rig the deep bits + derig up.
