Title: Mendips IV 
Date: 2005-03-13
Location: mendips
Summary:<b>Where?</b> Mendips, Somerset<br><b>When?</b> Sunday 13th March<br><b>What?</b> Strap-on-the-nitro Day Trip<br><b>How many?</b> With just day-sacks + no ropes, we should be able to takethe full minibus load... so 15-17<br><b>Experience Required?</b> Eager Fresher to Old Hand; multiple trips at multiple levels...<br><b>Cost?</b> 10-15 pounds [the more people come, the cheaper :)], plus pocket money for lunch + drink [from admittedly shaky memory; the extremely filling veggie pasta at the Hunters is 2.25]<br><br>Low cost, just a single day of your time + some fantastic sporting caving. From Fresher to Old Lag, you really do want to be on this trip! A few spaces left [managed to bag a 17 seater...], email address on the left to sign up!<br></p><p>Day trip flew; slightly problem when the pub it was planned to have lunch in turned out to be closed [Note to self - Hunters + New Inn open for Noon!]. Clewin, Sandeep, Adriel + Two Chinese hopped down Swildons to Sump 1 - Ad &amp; the Deepester sump dived. Jan, Lee, Rishi, Michelle, Allison and Lyndon did a 4-cave epic in the Sidcot Swallet area.
Type: trip
Photoarchive: /caving/photo_archive/posters/
Thumr: /caving/photo_archive/posters/lie_in_mendips_daytrip_poster_sandeep--thumb.jpg
Authors: Sandeep Mavadia
Oldurl:mendips/mendip-2005-03-13.php

# Mendips DayTrip

## Sunday 13th March 2005

## [Lyndon's Photos](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-03-13%20-%20mendips%20-%20lyndon/)

### Michhele Ghodrat, Ardiel Clark, Lyndon Leggate, Clewin Griffith, Sandeep
Mavadia, Alison O'Brian, others.

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-03-13%20-%20mendips%20-%20lyndon/overground/sm_152_5296.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-03-13%20-%20mendips%20-%20lyndon/overground/sm_152_5296.html)

## Swildons Hole

### Sandeep, Clewin, Adriel...

My second trip to the Mendips in as many weeks surely there's a vaccination
against that? And the same cave, it just can't be healthy. Down we went,
apparently I was the one who knew the way to the cave entrance which was a bit
un-nerving considering I wouldn't trust myself to find Buckingham Palace if I
had just walked down the Mall.

We got to the cave entrance and faffed for a few minutes while a group of four
were exiting. We entered the cave, down the very familiar slides at the
entrance series. We got to the climb down through the rift and everybody made
it down easily enough. Then we got at the ladder, Clewin rigged this with the
usual efficiency and speed. I went down first; this meant I could hold the
ladder straight as the rest descended. Next down was Chang'n'Chong and then
Adriel. All of whom made it down perfectly. Clewin decided he couldn't be
arsed with the ladder so in his infinite wisdom he abseiled down instead.
Onward we went, a couple of climb downs later at the twin pots we met a couple
who had just done the short round. All went well as we climbed and bimbled to
the sump.

The excuse I was waiting for was right on cue from Clewin "go through that and
tell me if it's the sump." I was even more up for it thanks to Jarv's Mig
light on my head rather than a FX3 [Ed: RatFink Sandeep was clearly forgetting
that Jarv's light wasn't/isn't properly waterproofed yet...]. Through I went,
it was an unusual feeling, I went for the head down and quickly through rather
than the lying down flat in the water and then pulling yourself through
method. Sump 1 is so short I didn't really get a chance to feel the cold on my
head, I was thinking about getting through and that was all. As soon as you
get out on the other side you can feel the new cold water inside your wetsuit,
a nice reminder that you really just did that. I had a look at the traffic
sign, Wookey hole 1 1/2 miles. I had a little look round and headed back, I
could really tell how short the sump was from the other side, I could see the
light from the FX3's on the other side. I got back to the other side and sat
around for a while. Adriel out of the blue said she wanted to try and she was
off, this was even more impressive because it was only her second weekend with
the club. Her first word when she got back was "hotdogs!" thanks to the floats
made out of hot dogs near the traffic sign; American imperialism is even in
the Mendips!

We decided to start moving so that we could get out at a decent time and not
get cold. Chang'n'Chong were in front for most of the time except for a few
climbs. At the ladder I went up first as Clewin Belayed from below.
Chang'n'Chong made it up fine, Adriel had a little difficulty but after a bit
of huffing and puffing she was up too. I tried to haul the tackle sack up but
it got stuck around a rock lip too high for Clewin to reach so he decided to
climb up unattached.

While Clewin sorted out the rope I tried to roll up the ladder and messing it
up totally, it was only bodge'd together later with a sling and an extra crab.
With Chang'n'Chong in the lead we were going like a bat out of hell and were
only slowed when instead of climbing up through the rift they decided to climb
into a little hole a bit further on. It was Chang'n'Chong out first followed
by me and then Adriel finally followed by Clewin, surealily crawling out of
the bottom of a tree.

Sandeep Mavadia

