Title: Mendips I
Date: 2017-01-13
Location: Mendips
Summary: We return to the Mendips for our annual baptism in Sump 1. Two teams in Swildon's on Saturday, and one in Longwood Swallet. The SMCC has a fantastic new squeeze machine which we combined with a table to create our own speleolympics in the evening. Sunday saw a trip to GB and another Swildons round trip (as well as an expedition to a tea shop).
Type: trip
Photoarchive:
Mainimg:
Thumbl: 
Thumbr: 
Authors: Rhys Tyers
Cavepeeps: DATE=2017-01-14; CAVE=Swildon's Hole; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Tanguy Racine, Peter Ganson, Kenneth Tan, Larry Jiang, Shaun Kong;
           DATE=2017-01-14; CAVE=Longwood Swallet; PEOPLE=Rhys Tyers, Ben Honan, David Wilson, James Wilson;
           DATE=2017-01-15; CAVE=GB Cave; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Peter Ganson, Larry Jiang, Shaun Kong;
           DATE=2017-01-15; CAVE=Swildon's Hole; PEOPLE=Tanguy Racine, Rhys Tyers, David Wilson, James Wilson;
Status: draft

{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}
#####{{ allpeople }}

##Friday

##Saturday

###Swildon's: {{ DATE=2017-01-14; CAVE=Swildon's Hole; }}

###Longwood Swallet: {{ DATE=2017-01-14; CAVE=Longwood Swallet; }}

Ben hates Swildon's. His reason is that he's been there too many times, however he has been there twice and has never been through sump 1 so many are understandably frustrated by his uninformed opinion. To appease our president, and being the accommodating and generally great person that I am, I agreed to go to a "Not Swildon's" cave in the Mendip. Months of research ensued, employing and the finest minds the caving club has to offer and using billions of pounds of tax payer money that could have otherwise funded the ailing NHS but in the end it was worth it. We managed to identify "Longwood Swallet" as a cave both that is both in the Mendips and is not Swildon's. Incredible!

Descriptions of the cave include words like "very wet", "literally in a waterfall", and "floods often and at random due to the Bristol Water Company". But we had an inside tip from a canoeist that all the rivers in Wales were dry. Extrapolating based on a remarkably poor understanding of geography we decided this meant the water levels in Mendip would be low and therefore it would be the perfect time to visit this otherwise intimidatingly wet cave.

We readied in the morning. I begin by getting bored of trying to decipher what rigging was necessary from Mendip Underground (making up for a lack of cave with an abundance of words is a common theme of MU) and instead packed all the ropes we had left after the Swildon's lot had taken theirs, plus one ladder. I also snapped up the Wilson brothers as mine and Ben's novices du jour. I figured these two former scouts would be the mostly likely to be prepared for sudden flooding.

Ben navigated expertly. Past the Charterhouse activity center, and down a lane towards "Lower Farm". We park on a grassy verge not far from the junction and just round the corner from the farm. We change and attempt to follow the directions on the  laminates Ben had printed. There's things about rising fields, following boundaries, a stile, a wooded valley. We wander uncertainly, managing to make the landscape around us fit this description until Ben suggests that he go back and get his phone, which can GPS us there. We already have a daren drum for stashing the keys in so he goes to retrieve it. 

The Wilson's and I sit in a grassy meadow. The sun shines, and though chilly, the air is relatively still and pleasant. Ben returns and we follow his phone back the way we came and past the minibus. A farmhouse is nestled in a wooded valley, and has lots of no trespassing signs. We consider our options and attempt to skirt around it. We climb up an overgrown path and scramble through some trees. Once past the farmhouse we tumble back down into the valley and after some further scrambling emerge on a path, with a wooden bridge. The bridge is on the description we have and so we quickly find the concrete entrance to Longwood not much further down the path. 

Ben attempts to unlock the gate whilst I do as the description suggests and amble down the small stream to find where it sinks. 20 metres further on it sinks into a small but deep rocky depression. Apparently if the water is not overflowing here it is a good sign that the cave is not too wet. I return to finish the unlocking process. I let Jimmy Dubz carry the bag and climb into Longwood.

The entrance is initially a slippery, drippy climb down. From what I've read I think it was relatively dry compared to normal but it was still unpleasant. At the bottom of the climb a small passage leads off. I insert myself feet first and wiggle down. It quickly becomes quite tight and committing. I reached an awkward corner. I back up into Jimmy Dubz to try and rotate to go in head first. We both have to back up quite a way before I can turn around. Descending head first is a bit scary but it allows me to negotiate the awkward corner. Following this is a squeeze I think known as "The Letterbox". I've got SRT gear on and make a few squeaky noises as I slither through but its not too bad. 

Another awkward squeeze brings you to the head the first optional ladder climb. Due to our lack of ladders we decided we'd try it as a handline. Jimmy Dubz rigs the line to a column further back and I drop down. Its a 4m climb down it's hard to see how a ladder would be particularly useful here unless there's substantial water flow normally (it was a dry climb for us). Down another little climb we come to a junction. Right leads to August passage, which sounds grim. We choose left and mince through Showerbath chamber, a waterfall on our heads. The way is on is down a slide down a small passage directly beneath the waterfall. Its a bit moist but the water veers off soon  enough. We pop out at a ledge above the Great Chamber.

I opt to rig the traverse round the side rather than attempt a climb in the water (though if it's ever possible, this would've been the time to do it). I find a nice boulder to rig off and with my descender providing a psychological belay I shimmy round. It's not hard, there's nice handholds and only one particularly airy step. On the other side there isn't much to attach a rope to. I loop some tape around a shallow nub of rock and tell Jimmy Dubz to follow. Once over I tell him to hold the tape onto the rock for the next person, as I did for him. He doesn't look pleased at this revelation.

Everyone now in the main chamber we pick our way down. It's very impressive! The floor slopes down at 60 degrees or so with the odd flattish ledge and the water runs over most of it. At the bottom we climb back up a mud slope on the right. The way down to the stream is not the first obvious hole in the wall here but a second higher up one. This is known as "Christmas Crawl" but is really a half metre squeeze past some calcite into another smaller chamber. From here a hole in the floor is "Swing Pitch". I rig a ladder and belay everyone down the 10 metres. An impressive jet of water is perilously close to the ladder but most people avoid the worst of it until the bottom. 

From there the passage is again a sharp downward sloping thing. Following the water with hands on the ceiling we climb down. This drops into the main streamway. We regroup and I randomly decide to go downstream. The streamway is narrow, and often stooping but it's incredibly pretty, the walls are almost all covered with calcite flows and stals. Every now and then the calcite has built and you have to wiggle through a constriction with the stream, often over a little waterfall into a pool below. Its obvious that this would be very unpleasant in high water but it's merely sporting for us. Ben feels light headed and asks about bad air. I'm also a little light headed but suspect dehydration. After a while the streamway opens out a little and the ceiling disappears high above.

We come across a small inlet emerging from a tube 2m up the wall. Dave asks to go and look down it. I tell him that he certainly can. He does. Jimmy Dubz follows, keen not to be outdone. Ben and I sit in the main streamway with lights off until they return reporting many metres of wet crawl. We debate turning round here, as were are still entertaining the idea of popping into GB before heading home. I suggest we go round one more corner because it looks pretty. Dave leads on. Round one more corner I suggest one more and then another. Finally the passage closes down to another flat out crawl in the streamway. I am about to suggest this as our turning round point but before I can Dave is through. One more squeeze then. Fortunately beyond we arrive at a sump. Dave and James take turns inserting themselves into it, seeing how far they can get. I end the game as Dave gets up to his shoulders.

We bimble out, the way out much quicker than the way in. In the awkward entrance series I get Jimmy Dubz to drag the bag in front of me, and I unstick it when it becomes stuck every few metres. I'm not sure if this was easier in total effort than one person pushing it ahead but it was definitely easier for me and I still got to look like I was doing something while JDubz did most of the work.

On the surface again we fumble with the lock and then walk back, this time electing to use the obvious path that we joined halfway last time. Now the MU description makes more sense and we follow it backwards popping out pretty much next to the minibus. Mendip Underground it seems misses out a minor but crucial tip that from where you park you have to walk back up the road, away from the farm to find the path.

We gather round the minibus and debate for a while the merits of going to GB. It's very hard to tell what the Wilson's true desires are but when I eventually decide that we'll go cider and cheese shopping in Cheddar instead they both look quite please. Jimmy Dubz finds my croll where I carefully placed it in the grass 5 hours before. Changed I manage to get the minibus off the slippy grass verge (I was worried).

Lack of ubiquitous 4g forces us to navigate by "road signs", large markers engraved with runes left by the side of the road by ancient civilisations. We have a disappointing time in town. I guess January isn't peak time but there was just one cider shop open and it was pretty pricey. Whilst wandering Ben does the unthinkable and asks a passing stranger where he can buy cider. They suggest that a mile up some road there's a big cider place. Luckily this is on our way home. We drive a mile up the road and there's no cider place. We continue on until some flashing lights and thumping music catch out attention. There's a shed by the side of the road, and there seems to be a makeshift pub in it. I do a u-ey and park next it. 

We walk into the 5m by 5m room. 20 pairs of local eyes tear away from their conversational partners and fix beadily on us. Even the music seems to quiet. Ben asks if they do cider to go. The woman behind the small bar points to a pair of plastic containers hanging from the ceiling with prices on. She asks what we want. Ben asks what she's got. She offers to let us taste a couple. Ben agrees, and at that moment a man bursts out from the back room announcing that we're "not interested in the taste" and that we "just want to get completely bollocksed". He then mutters something about our age and the woman asks for ID. Before we can get any though she hands us a small amount of cider to taste. ID forgotten we try a few. The Dubz brothers settle on a sweet cider. Ben asks if she has anything special for discerning customers. She reaches beneath the bar and brings up a sip of a different cider. This one has the methanol taste we're looking for so we buy a thing of it. I'm sure if went back to this place again it would be gone.

##Sunday

###GB: {{ DATE=2017-01-15; CAVE=GB Cave; }}

###Swildon's: {{ DATE=2017-01-15; CAVE=Swildon's Hole; }}
