Title: Mendips III 
Date: 2005-02-25
Location: mendips
Summary: Just back from a stonking stomp down Somerset; Swildons, Longwood and Goatchurch [failed to find key for Charterhouse] were all enjoyed by a motley crew of 15 ICCC'ers. All trips bar one exited before daylight, weather gloriously sunny but bitter with the occasional dusting of snow; tables were duly traversed, Veggie nosh greedily gobbled, bottles walked and a generally good time endured! Having gone away for the weekend and had such a consistently pleasant experience is most discombobulating, I fear that ICCC is softening! I may have to pour a bucket of snow-melt over my head and sit for a few hours in the fridge to convince myself otherwise...
Type: trip
Thumbl: /caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/goatchurch/IMG_0541--thumb.jpg
Thumr:/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/belfry/IMG_0428--thumb.jpg
Authors: Sandeep Mavadia, Jarvist Frost
Cavepeeps: DATE=2005-02-26; CAVE=Longwood Swallet; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, Joe King, Clewin Griffiths, Ben Ogborne, Maud Langlois, Denis Langlois;
           DATE=2005-02-26; CAVE=Swildon's Hole; PEOPLE=Tim Osborne, Adriel Clark, Michelle Ghodrat;
	   DATE=2005-02-27; CAVE=Goatchurch Cavern; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, Joe King, Clewin Griffiths, Maud Langlois, Denis Langlois, Darryl Anderson, Sandeep Mavadia, Adam Dobson, Oded Kutok, Adriel Clark, Michelle Ghodrat;
Oldurl:/caving/mendips/mendip-2005-02-25.php


{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/goatchurch/IMG_0477.JPG,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/goatchurch/IMG_0477.html)

[Photos](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/)

### [Five in Front]: Adriel Clark, Michelle Ghodrat, Gerardo Ocana-Fuentes, Jarvist Frost, Joanna King

### [All the Rest]: Denis Langlois, Adam Dobson, Oded Kutok, Darryl Anderson, Clewin Griffith, Sandeep Mavadia, Maud Langlois [Hiding in a conspicuous blue helmet!]

### People gone by Sunday: Ben Ogbourne, Tim Comer, Mike

### 15 Cavers!

## Saturday

### Longwood: Jarv, Jo, Clew, Ben, Maud, Denis

{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0360--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0360.html)
{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0361--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0361.html)

Mud-monster Ben slithered &amp; slurped into his festering [_Ben says 'It was
the freshest of mud - only three days old!_] and horrendously heavy caving
gear; fresh from a dig in Rose-Cottage Cavern. Sandeep 'Spatial Awareness'
Mavadia had picked out a too-small oversuit for Michelle, which I, being a
skinny runt, could just about squeeze into; though with the constant fear of
being bisected from the groin up if I bent over too quickly...Bimbled through
the plush scenary towards the cave entrance; meeting a party of three exiting
cavers with sparklingly clean kit. Not that unusual for an ICCC trip to meet
exiting cavers as we go in, but it was a mere One O'Clock today.

Ben wrestled the padlocked entrance open as the rest of us admired the
babbling brock and small stream which seamed to be diving down throug the
cracks in the concrete... T'was going to be a wet one!

{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0378--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0378.html)
{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0384--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0384.html)

Descent quickly tightened into an extremely drippy and fairly tight chimney
down a rift, continuously snatching at my helmet as I clambered. Lifting my
knees to climb on the way up was going to be interesting! Vertical stuff
bottomed out and changed into a fairly wretched flat-out crawl through rift,
generally out of the stream. One particular bit however involved creative
reverse parking around a right-angle bend with my chest dragged fully through
the water. Was most glad for the 5mm wetsuit! Jo being Jo, managed to crawl
straight around without even so much as dipping her chin in the water!

Rift meandered down pleasently; briefly opening up fully for Showerbath
chamber, involving a dash through a pretty full flowing waterful and then a
dive down into rift. Again pretty tight; but with gravity assistence we were
making extremely good time... First ladder [supposedly free-climable] pitch
was really quite pleasent, nice rigging off a wire grooved calcite column and
a gentle slope onto the vertical section. Passageway continued fairly openly
until reaching another waterfall; where a brief snooze was enjoyed as the
'boys rigged a dodgy traverse with our Old dynamic rope and a penknife.
Rigging was shonky; rope tied securely round trapped boulder on the nearside,
but then stuck to progressively backed up pieces of mud on the other... Ideal
place for a few P-Bolts?

Traverse was fine for the long-legged, one can cuddle the overhang rock while
placing the outreaching leg on the rock shelf beyond. Would be pretty dodge
without a handline for the sub-six-footers.

{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0385--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0385.html)
{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0399--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0399.html)

Clambered down into an impressively large chamber; vertical waterfall
transitioning smoothly into 45-degree slope, one would go an awful long way if
you slipped on the traverse! Popped back up for the tackle sack, then followed
the way on along a rock-shelf round to the right, finally diving down a 45
degree tube into a little chamber with loud crashing water. Second ladder
pitch, accessed by climbing over the pitch and then rigging from the
otherside, had a veritable Torrent of water exiting horziontally across the
pitch with much gusto. Considering the weight of the water crashing down
directly where the ladder would have to be rigged, a general decision was made
to exit slowly, exploring other reaches.

Back in the main chamber, meandering crawly rift way was followed down to its
plughole [which Ben dipped himself in] ending, we had followed the general run
of the way on - and must have been physically very close to the head of the
2nd ladder pitch. Rift was pushed upstream from a junction to a grim and low-
ceiling'd entrance. Managed to smash my knee into a projecting rock flake,
managing to get that sweet-spot without knee-paddage where you can try your
best to cleave your knee caps off.

Smooth + Steady exit was then executed; slight mis-navigation just before the
Showerbath where GI-Jo + I pushed up the streamway to an increasingly tight
and wet squeeze [rock was noticeably rougher just beyond where it got 'too
tight']. Backed up and followed the climb up into and through the Waterfall.

{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0404--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0404.html)
{!left}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0403--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/longwood/IMG_0403.html)

Squeezy rift was quite exhausting work to pass, last bit of chimney was
particularly grim - couldn't look up into the stinging water, couldn't see
beyond knees when looking down - left groping in the dark. Padlock proved
troublesome but not horrendous, a bit of jiggling and we were soon outside
into the bright daylight! Maud + Denis had a little problem navigating just
before the wet right-angled bend, continuing up instead of diving left over
flow-stone into the low-ceiling'd passage. Ben + Clew appeared soon after;
Clewin having found the chimney pretty dire - tacklebag of wet rope + droplet
coated / mud smeared glasses effectively his visibility to nothing.

Ben, in his element, dived into the brook to wash the last remains of the mud
off his now beautifully clean gear! One wonders whether his choice of cave was
somehow motivated by his reluctance to clean his kit...

Jarvist Frost

### Swildons [attempted short round]: Darryl, Sandeep, Adam, Oded

IT WAS THE BEST OF TIMES, IT WAS THE WORST OF TIMES. STOPPED BY 45 MINUTES OF
BAILING MUD SUMP, BACK TO THE WOBBLY LADDER AND WANING DAYLIGHT.

Adam Dobson

Short trip down to Mud Sump. Intended to do the short round, but after bailing
for almost an hour, the sump had air space but we had no inclination to carry
on. Headed back for food at the Belfry.

Darryl Anderson

After a lot of shaking, pulling and grunting Gerardo was in his wetsuit and we
were off, it was only later that I realised it was inside-out, but hey-ho.
There was some trouble with oversuits, though I absolve all responsibility of
the Tackle Master, how could I have known that an oversuit about my size
wouldn.t fit Michelle? Soon we were within Swildons and saying a fond .cya
later. to the other group who were embarking upon an exploration of the upper
series.

We were off and all was well down the entrance and along the climbs, we
arrived at the ladder. I went down first as none of the freshers had
experienced the swinging joys of electron ladders before. Next down was Adam,
he was fine but I think holding the ladder at the bottom helped a bit, Gerardo
missed a few foot holds but got down fine in the end and Oded followed like a
pro. Daryl ended getting belayed by the group behind; maybe he didn.t trust
being belayed from the bottom by me, I wonder why?

Daryl expertly reminded me about the dwarf traps, twin pots, but I still
climbed right into the middle of the first one. They weren.t a scratch on
Grenoble but still deep enough; I learnt my lesson for the next one and
traversed around the edge of it.

Everybody climbed above the stream way at Trapman.s temple surprisingly well,
quite annoyed that I hadn.t seen a fresher bounce and fall back into the
stream way I followed behind. From there on we had a few squeezes, and
although Gerardo didn.t seem to enjoy these too much, he carried on like a
trooper. A bit more squeezing and climbing and we were at the mud sump where
we meet the Reading guys who had passed us at Trapmans Temple.

This was where Adam-the-mad-mud-sump-bailer got into his stride, he was
bailing away at the top dam and keeping up with the other 7 people feeding him
with fetid water. The Reading guys were there for 15 minutes already, and it
took a further 45 minutes of combined effort before we saw some airspace. In
total I think we must have moved a few cubic meters [tons!] of water. By now
the freshers were tiring and a commitment to the short-round trip was judged
by Darryl to be foolhardy, so after seeing the Reading push through, we
decided to abort.

The way out was a lot faster than going in, partially because of Gerardo.s .I
just wanted to get out of that [squeeze]. approach. Thanks to Adams sneakily
packed waterproof bag there was plenty of chocolate to go around as well as a
drop of refreshing water.

Descending through Trapmans Temple was more difficult than the ascent, as is
so often with freeclimbs. I ended up wedging myself under the particularly
fresher unfriendly bits, even though I know that I.m a pretty pathetic as a
doorstop, and slowly coaxed them down.

At the ladder I belayed Daryl up, this time he had no choice in the matter! He
didn.t fall off, so I wasn.t put to the test. The rope was just around a
pulley at the top so if he had properly dropped, he.d [not so] slowly fall to
the floor and while I.d end up suspended in mid air by my battery belt.

Everybody headed on out with out much problem, except for a few climbs where
you had to think first instead of just launching yourself up and where I
walked into a dead-end rift and then looked up to see Daryl grinning and
waving while saying .what are you doing down there you muppet?.

We were out by 6, clothed &amp; in the van by 7. By all accounts an excellent
trip even though we didn.t lose any freshers.

Sandeep Mavadia

### Swildons [Upper series]: Tim, Mike, Adriel, Michelle

My left boot didn't like me at all and fell off three times. Tim called me a
natural... just before catching me as I fell from an 8 foot climb. Much fun
and water ensued.

Adriel Clark

## Sunday

### Goatchurch [Failed to get key for Charterhouse...]: Jarv, Jo, Clew, Maud,
Denis, Darryl, Sandeep, Adam, Oded, Adriel, Michelle

{!left}(jo_big.gif)_Beware the Drainpipe; Here be Dragons!_,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-02-25%20-%20mendips/goatchurch/IMG_0523.html)

A. Caver

