Title: Austria
Date: 2006-07-15
Location: austria
Summary: This summer a few of us went to Austria to do some expedition caving and gawp at the locals wearing traditional Dimdl and Lederhosen. On another level to caving in Britain: longer, deeper and harder, but all possible with just a year of caving experience.<br><br>A brand new cave was found and explored to 150 metres deep, twice the height of Queens Tower, and is still going strong, with a 50 metre pitch at the end waiting to be dropped...
Type: tour
Authors: Sandeep Mavadia
Photoarchive: /rcc/caving/photo_archive/tours/2006%20-%20austria%20-%20various/
Mainimg: 204-csb-Mark_shinwell.JPG
Thumbl: tunnocks-entrance-Mark_shinwell--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: 204-riverdance-Mark_shinwell--thumb.jpg
Oldurl:/caving/austria/austria_felix.php

{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}

### A typical day on the Caving Club's summer expedition:

Only nine months since I started caving, here I was: the first person ever to
set foot in this passageway, 200 metres below the surface of an Austrian
mountain.  
  
I was there with members of Imperial College Caving Club, and this was the
final trip of the expedition. We had passed the obstacle that stopped us last
time, a 9m vertical drop in the cave floor. My caving buddy hammered a bolt
into the wall and we tied on a rope so we could abseil down. Once at the
bottom we were in a never-before explored part of the cave, walking into the
unknown.  
  
Clambering over the boulder strewn ground we noticed the gaps between the
rocks, wedged together 2m above the 'real' floor. Unsure how stable our
footing was we treaded with caution further into the cave. We felt the
character of the passage change; an eerie draught started sucking along the
passage, our voices starting to echo off something a very long way away. As we
passed the last corner we suddenly emerged into the blackness, our lights
swallowed up by the sheer enormity of the chasm that opened up before us.  
  
We hurled a chunk of rock into the pit, counting the seconds until it reached
the floor. One... Two...Still Nothing...Three... Boom! Rattle! Rattle! Fifty
metres deep!  
  
This was a real monster, and would need more time to conquer than we had.
Longer underground would risk alerting the rest of the team who awaited our
return, snug in our mountain-top camp so we had to leave.  
  
5 hours later the two of us were standing at the entrance to the cave, cold
and exhausted but with an immense sense of achievement. We staggered back to
our camp, navigating by cairns that had been erected over the previous 4 weeks
in good time to join our friends around the campfire, to chat elatedly about
our discoveries over fantastically warming curry before collapsing into our
sleeping bags.  
  
Does the cave continue beyond that last enormous drop? Nobody knows. There
could be kilometres more to find, or it could end around the next corner. It
will take another expedition in another year to find out - only this time you
could be there as well.  
  
**About the club**   
Although caving is certainly challenging, both physically and psychologically,
it is neither competitive nor macho. Caving is the perfect team sport: since
everyone's safety depends on the group, there is no room for showing off. The
aim is to use people's different skills in cooperation, to further common
goals of exploration and enjoyment. No prior experience is required: all the
necessary training is done within the club, drawing on the experience of our
older members. All trips are tailored to the skills and wishes of those taking
part &amp; you will never be asked to do things that you are unhappy with or
that we do not feel you are ready for yet.  
  
ICCC runs regular weekend trips to caving destinations around the UK - usually
costing £25-30 inclusive of all training, equipment, transportation,
accommodation, food and leadership. As well as our summer expedition (normally
to Slovenia), we have a week-long tour in Easter to somewhere warm, and long-
weekends to destinations around Europe in the spring and summer.  
  
We meet weekly on Tuesdays in the Union from 7:30pm; with additional rope-
climbing practice in the trees in Princes Garden. Pick up a flyer at freshers
fair or check the website for more details.  
  
Sandeep Mavadia

