Title: Hungary
Date: 2017-03-29
Location: hungary
Summary: ICCC is always hungry for caving and so we decided to go caving in Hungary. We spent exploring the best caves Hungary has to offer. Nestled in the Bukk Mountains we traversed several km underground through Baradla Barlang, a vast river, descended 300 m on iron ladders deep into Szepesi, and caved with Budapest caving clubs finest. 
Type: tour
Photoarchive: /rcc/caving/photo_archive/tours/2017%20-%20Hungary
Mainimg: RhysTyers-DSC04332.jpg
Thumbl: RhysTyers-DSC04701--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: RhysTyers-DSC04523--thumb.jpg
Authors: Rhys Tyers 
Cavepeeps: DATE=2017-03-30; CAVE=Baradla Barlang; PEOPLE=Arun Paul, Rhys Tyers, Ho Yan Jin, Rebecca Diss, Edith Huebner, Jack Hare, Kenneth Tan, Larry Jiang, Peter Ganson, Sam Page, Tanguy Racine;
           DATE=2017-03-31; CAVE=Beke Barlang; PEOPLE=Arun Paul, Rhys Tyers, Ho Yan Jin, Rebecca Diss, Edith Huebner, Jack Hare, Kenneth Tan, Larry Jiang, Peter Ganson, Sam Page, Tanguy Racine;
           DATE=2017-04-01; CAVE=István-lápai Barlang; PEOPLE=Arun Paul, Rhys Tyers, Ho Yan Jin, Rebecca Diss, Edith Huebner, Peter Ganson, Sam Page;
           DATE=2017-04-01; CAVE=Szepesi Barlang; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Kenneth Tan, Larry Jiang, Tanguy Racine;
           DATE=2017-04-02; CAVE=Szepesi Barlang; PEOPLE=Arun Paul, Rhys Tyers, Ho Yan Jin, Rebecca Diss, Edith Huebner, Peter Ganson, Sam Page;
           DATE=2017-04-02; CAVE=István-lápai Barlang; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Kenneth Tan, Larry Jiang, Tanguy Racine;
Status: 

{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}

##### {{ allpeople }}

## Wednesday 29th March

We flew to Budapest and hired 3 cars then drove to Szilvásvárad and stopped on the way for some food supplies, arriving at the villa in the early evening.

## Thursday 30th March

We had an early start and drove to Aggtelek National Park which is home to the Baradla show cave. We met with our guide and set off for a 6-8 hour through trip. The entrance and exit were both well lit with some stunning formations. The tour also involved a detour down the Radish Branch, so called because of the many radish shaped formations lining the walls. We were driven back to the entrance in a minibus which was included with the tour.

## Friday 31st March

Another early start and we drove to Aggtelek National Park for a morning of cave photography in the Beke cave. The cave was vertical with 300 steps at the entrance. It was a wet cave and involved a few climbs made harder by the slick mud. A significant portion of this trip was spent using three flashes to take photographs of formations. In the afternoon we drove back to Szilvásvárad and some of the group went hiking in the local area.

## Saturday 1st May

We met up with a group of cavers from Budapest to visit caves named Istvan-Lapai and Szepesi in the Bukk mountains. 7 of the group went to Szepesi and the remaining 4 went to Istvan-Lapai. The Szepesi trip involved a descent using a series of ladders, some being 20-30m tall. At the bottom, the cave was vertical and had two passages ending in sumps. Four of the group headed back midway down the second passage and the remaining three continued to the end. This involved lots of free climbing and some muddy squeezes.

Istvan-Lapai had a similar start with a descent using ladders but this was much longer (totalling 200m of elevation loss). The cave also featured a 80m tall SRT loop around a large flowstone and several intriguing sumps. 

## Sunday 2nd May

We met up with the Hungarian cavers again and visited the same caves but the groups switched so those that went to Istvan-Lapai on Saturday went to Szepesi and vice versa. Three of the group decided not to go to Istvan-Lapai and instead went hiking in the surrounding forest. 

## Monday 3rd May

The group went hiking up Tor-Kö and Haram-Kö and then spent the evening cooking food over the fire to round off the Tour.

## Tuesday 4th May

We split into two groups with two cars spending the day driving through the mountains with a stop at Eger to see the castle and one car going to Budapest to see the sights. We met up at around 4pm to return the cars and the flight left budapest around 8pm.

#### Tanguy Racine