Title: Japan 2005
Date: 2005-04-01
Location: japan
Summary: Three old lags, capsule hotels &amp; caving in the snow.
Type: tour
Photoarchive: /rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-04-01%20-%20japan%20-%20jan/
Mainimg:  jan10152.JPG
Thumbl: jan10176--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: jan10188--thumb.jpg
Authors: Jan Evetts
Oldurl: /rcc/caving/old/japan/japan-2005-04-01.php

## [Photos](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-04-01%20-%20japan%20-%20jan/dirin
dex.html)

### ICCC contingency - Jan, Clewin, Tetley; Tokyo Speleo Club - Minato,
Satoshi, Keiko, Ton; Viet-Cong

{{ mainimg }}

It was 12pm on Friday night, we were waiting at our rendez-vous in Tokyo. A
people carrier pulled up, it was Minato, Keiko and Ton; we all piled in, the
first thing we noticed was that they were watching football, Iran playing
Japan, on the in-car guidance screen. Very nice.

We settle in for our 7hr drive to Kumaishi cave.

## Saturday

### Gifu prefecture, Japan

7am, somewhere. Lots of hills covered in snow; we pull up outside a 7-11 type
place and spill out into the cool morning air, stretching and yawning.

After grabbing ourselves a breakfast of doughnuts and crisps, we take a windy
winding road up and up into the snowy hills. Outside the local farmers house
we stop to leave a gift; then head up a track into woods. At a grade 3
changing spot, we stand in the snow and take off warm fluffy clothes,
replacing them with minimalist cave clothing: 3/4 length boiler suit (still
with traces of Morocco's finest mud), walking boots and thermals.

### Kumaishi-do, Rigging Trip:

With tackle bags of rope, borrowed SRT kits and familiar petzl hangers and
maillons, we set off. A short walk later up through the trees, we stand
peering into a 20m shaft, blowing out delightfully warm air. Tetley gets
nominated lead rigger.

At the bottom of the first pitch Clewin and I are in some confusion about the
way on. Aswell as being spiky, the rock has the structural properties of
Ryvita which makes climbing and traversing a bit exciting - which is exactly
what we were attempting, over bottomless pits. Where had everyone buggered off
to?

Down a second pitch and then we are stood at the top of a 60m drop. Tetley
rigs down, tentatively; his light swinging around the shaft as he disappears
downwards, tying belays that alternate between bolts and rusty pitons. He
seems to take forever, but we eventually start to follow. The fine shaft opens
out and deposits us on a rubble pile, sloping down into a big chamber. A short
climb up on the left leads upto the final pitch. This drops into a chamber by
a monster rock-slab, propped up against the wall.

At this point we head out leaving ropes rigged.

### Bath Time, Eating and Drinking:

In town we picked-up breakfast supplies and beer. I say we, personally I was
struggling with the fact that we were in a normal supermarket, yet playing
'animal, vegetable or mineral?' with the products down the aisles!

We then head to an onsen, fantastic hot baths, including an outside steam pool
with views over the river. Afterward we are relaxed in the lobby rehydrating,
Clewin was straight onto beer. Keiko had a grey Sesame Seed flavoured ice-
cream, I try the Green Tea. After a delicious meal, we head to our cabin;
traditional mats and mattresses, and paper walls which don't seem too good for
insulation. But, there's a secret weapon. In the centre of the main room we
sit cross-legged around a low table, which has a duvet around the edge to
cover your legs and a built-in heater, fantastic. So we drink beer, whisky and
play paper, scissor, stone to decided whose making breakfast.

## Sunday

### Sump Spotting, De-rig Trip:

After breakfast, we meet the 'VC' and explore further into the system with Ton
and Satoshi. Clambering under the slab we had seen before, we thrutch through
some rifty stuff which opens up into a series of impressive galleries. A short
pitch drops into a chamber, followed by nasty spiky rift, with increasingly
hairy climbs, obviously very little visited. Really wishing I had some knee or
elbow protection other than a flimsy bit of cotton, we finally reach a truly
underwhelming sump pool. On the main pitch, on the way out, a second rope has
been rigged so its one 40m hang, which is quite impressive.

Soon we pack up and head back to Tokyo. Minato offers to drop us off at our
hotel, our blank stares bely our standard lack of forward planning. 'Er...No
plan!', we say smiling and shrugging. This has become our catchphrase. Its the
perfect opportunity to explore the delights of capsule hotels, but thats
another story...

Jan Evetts

