Title: Wales I
Date: 2017-10-13
Location: wales
Summary: Our first trip of the year! We tackled OFD II and Cwm Dwr on Saturday, with two teams down to maypole and another half way down the streamway, and on Sunday two bimble trips and a Cwm Dwr to OFD II epic!
Photoarchive:
Mainimg: RhysTyers-DSC07002.jpg
Thumbl: RhysTyers-DSC06912.jpg
Thumbr: RhysTyers-DSC06855.jpg
Authors: James Perry;
Cavepeeps: DATE=2017-10-14; CAVE=Ogof Ffynnon Ddu; PEOPLE=Tanguy Racine, Rhys Tyers, Nathaniel Oshunniyi, Joshua Newington,
    DATE=2017-10-14; CAVE=Ogof Ffnnon Ddu; PEOPLE= James Perry, Arun Paul, David Kirkpatrick, May Law, Rayson Ng, Felicia Burtscher
    DATE=2017-10-14; CAVE=Ogof Ffnnon Ddu; PEOPLE= Jarvist Frost, Peter Ganson, Rebecca Diss, Mark Gee, Jean-Yves Burlet
    DATE=2017-10-14; CAVE=Cwm Dwr; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Alex Seaton, Alex Betts, Jennifer Ryder, Benjamin Richards
    DATE=2017-10-15; CAVE=Ogof Ffynnon Ddu; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, James Perry, Rebecca Diss, Jean-Yves Burlet, Nathaniel Oshunniyi, Joshua Newington 
    DATE=2017-10-15; CAVE=Ogof Ffynnon Ddu; PEOPLE=Peter Ganson, Arun Paul, Alex Seaton, Alex Betts, May Law, Jennifer Ryder
    DATE=2017-10-15; CAVE=Cwm Dwr; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, Tanguy Racine, Rhys Tyers, Benjamin Richards
   

Status:
{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}
#####{{ allpeople }}


## Weekend
I thought the trip was quite sensational. Lots of food, lots of booze, and lots of intense caving! At first I was quite seriously 
scared of the drops and stuff in the cave, but after a while I felt like I was Bear Grylls doing the real-life version of minecraft.
#### Nathaniel

## Friday
After bundling all the kit into the minibus we were almost ready to go. Luckily josh and nathaniel sneaking off to eat at the union 
wasn't our limiting factor, since we were waiting for “Tanguy’s Mum” to give the caving club a “surprise”. The drive went well except 
for google ruining the darude experience for the freshers and forcing us over the small severn bridge.


#### James Perry

## Saturday
Wow, being president is a thing now. I overall managed to get some groups sorted and headed off down OFD II with a quality group.
Me and Arun were “leading” and definitely not getting lost. I would give some lovely information about where we went but it took far
too long to get to gnome passage and I have no idea where we were half the time. DKP almost certainly knew where we were the entire
time and wouldn't tell us the way until we decided to turn around. He would then “Just go and have a look over there” and magically
“find something that looks like the way”. May, Ray and Felicia were unphased (so far) enough to follow me down the waterfall drenched
ladder at Maypole and we scrambled down a few more until we could see the torrential streamway. We weren’t planning on drowning anytime
soon, and had only come down to be cold and wet anyway, so we turned around. After getting lost numerous times on the way out, I 
eventually convinced the novices to follow me down Maypole to have a look at the fast flowing streamway. I hoped this would add some
adventure and a reward for putting up with me. On the way out we bumped into Rhys, Tanguy, Nathaniel and Josh for a cheeky photo sesh 
in Big Chamber By The Entrance before eventually heading back to the hut. Food was great, roast veg and mash is definitely going to 
feature more often, and so is a bottle of whisky. Caving games where a large social affair since nottingham had 18 people to add to our
20. I was glad that everyone seemed to be enjoying themselves and slunk off to bed an hour earlier than the team at about 1am.


#### James Perry

## Sunday:
Felicia and Rayson from my team on the saturday informed me they had no caving intentions. This Hurt. I informed everyone else that the
cave had broken them but to my disappointment May informed us that “It wasn’t the cave. You broke them”. I was eager to have a better
day of caving! Formed a Crack group with Jack, Jean, Nathaniel and Josh and after a huge morning farce Diss ended up being the cherry
on the cake. We headed off to poached egg which turned into a novice leading bimble before turning back to take photos in Arete Chamber.
After this we tried to find the connection to Big Chamber By the Entrance, what we found was an awesome passage with plenty of dodge. 
This did however end short as it became gradually less novice friendly and we were time conscious. Note to self, do go there again!
I decided not to eat anything before driving all the way back myself. I mostly forgot to swap because a 3 hour game of contact was
distracting me. But I also just wanted to get back and new a few pints at the union would fill me up. 


#### James Perry
