Title: Slovenia
Date: 2005-08-15
Location: slovenia
Type: index
Thumbr: /rcc/caving/old/slovenia/miglogo.png

ICCC is back from their Slovenia 2005 Expedition. Captain Kangaroo, a window off the impressive Pico pitch at -150m in Gardener's World was pushed for over 200m of passage, currently ending at a squeeze before a large pitch. Though we believe this to be Concorde Pitch, there are still going leads. KK also exhibits the first clear evidence of seismic activity in the caves of Migovec - large cracks are evident in the wall of the tight but extremely interesting rift-way.

A lot of time was spent developing entrances in a new caving area, Area K. Over 15 entrances were logged, all of which offer scope for further cave development - though most require a degree of digging. Most impressive were K9 and K12/K13. K9 is a ~15m pitch into a small chamber that connects directly to a parallel shaft. From the bottom of the parallel shaft, an extensive and multiple level boulder choke exists that continues West. K12 [Victoria Coach Station] is an impressive snow-sloped cave, with a beautiful dome ~50m across with up to a ~20m high ceiling. There is an extremely drafty bedding plane dig in the north of the cave. K13 is a small passage entered on the hill above K12, it drops into a antechamber [The Arrivals Hall] above K12, which can then be descended into through a 1m across hole in the floor.

Much to type up &amp; many stories to tell - expect a full load of information over the next couple of weeks, but for now relish the fantastic <a href="/caving/photo_archive/slovenia/2005/dirindex.html">Photos</a>!<br>

<br><a href="/caving/old/slovenia/slov2005/newsletter1.php">Expo 2005 Newsletters</a>
<br><a href="/caving/old/slovenia/slov2005/updates.php">Expedition Updates + News</a>
<br><a href="/caving/old/slovenia/slov2005/logbook.php">Expedition Logbook [VERY INCOMPLETE]</a>

