Title: Welcome 2018 Freshers
Date: 2018-10-02
Location:
Type: index

Welcome, 2018 freshers, to the Imperial College Caving Club website! If you’re interested in caving, then this is probably the place for you.

There’s a list of our upcoming trips above and the website contains loads of useful info for new and prospective members [here](/rcc/caving/pages/clubinfo.html). You can also check out our trip reports (e.g. [Wales](/rcc/caving/articles/wales-2013-10-25.html) +  [Yorkshire](/rcc/caving/articles/yorkshire-2014-11-28.html) for a better idea of what a weekend with us entails!

If you have any questions, feel free to email us on our <a href="mailto:ic.caving@gmail.com">gmail account</a>, or join our [facebook group](https://www.facebook.com/groups/578983745563159/) to get the most up to date info on trips and socials.

We’ll be in Beit Quad for Fresher’s Fair and hope to see you there! We’ll also be holding a meet & greet plus tree training (aka dangling from trees in caving kit) in Princes Gardens from 12pm on Wednesday 3rd October. If you’re not sure where to go, we’ll be in pretty noticeable caving kit mingling around one of the big trees on the Ethos side of the gardens. Tree training will then occur every Wednesday of first term from 12pm!

You can find us at the Union Bar/FiveSixEight every Tuesday from 6pm where we’ll be drinking beer and possibly be in the possession of a noticeable caving helmet.

Watch this video for some more info on the club and how to get involved from one of our ex-presidents!
<div class="center">
<video width="95%" controls poster="/rcc/caving/videos/promotional/CavingPromoVideo2015.jpg">
	<!-- MP4 must be first for iPad! -->
	<source src="/rcc/caving/videos/promotional/CavingPromoVideo2015.mp4" type="video/mp4" /><!-- Safari / iOS video / ie   -->
	<source src="/rcc/caving/videos/promotional/CavingPromoVideo2015.webm" type="video/webm" /><!-- Firefox / Opera / Chrome10 -->
</video>
</div>
