Title: New Zealand: First Impressions
Date: 2015-04-06
Location: NSG Hut, Takaka
Summary: The first steps are taken in New Zealand. Jet lag and rain hamper progress but the team is determined to get things done.
Author: Jack Hare

New Zealand caving is completely different to UK caving: we are staying in
a hut, the roads to the caves are awful and the food is mostly lentils. Due to
horrific weather, we have been unable to convince a helicopter pilot to risk
his life and career by flying us and our heavy, heavy equipment up the
mountain. Whilst we wait for this apocalyptic storm to pass, we cower in the
Nelson Speleological Group's extremely cute hut in Takaka hill.

The effects of jet lag are severe. Our mental faculties are not what they once
were. Tanguy descends often into fits of giggling, and of course caves.

Yesterday we went to the beach, and met with some NZ cavers that gave us loads
of good advice, and camped at a little campground in a secluded valley. Today
we spent an hour and a half buying all the food and supplies for the
expedition, arriving at the supermarket at 0700 and ending up with literally
all the peanuts, raisins and lentils in the store. We then drove to Takaka
Hill.

Kieran showed us a cave about 100m from the hut. This was excellent as when we
got to the bottom we could send Alex back for cookies and water. The cave was
quite loose, but very pretty and felt unexplored. Rhys chickened out of a grim
crawl in the final lead that we tried to push.

Tomorrow we will get very wet and try to get a tire repaired that has been left
too long thanks to Jesus and Easter. Please someone stop James from writing
a log book entry again.

The effects of jet lag are severe.

####Jack Hare
