Title: Yorks II 
Date: 2004-11-26
Location: yorkshire
Summary: Well, we didn't quite make it to the Seminar; but had an epic series of interlocking trips down Easegill on the Saturday, with a serendipitous meet up of three different groups underground. Got lost in the fog + driving rain on the boggish moors, but everybody made it back in the end to consume a gallon or so of pasta 'n' sauce. Sunday was more sedate for the majority, quaffing vast flagons of coffee and gnawing on house bricks of chocolate cake at Inglesport cafe. The zealous freshers [Jack, Nicholas, Lester, Alvin] followed Jesus down Agill + seemed to have a pleasant enough trip.
Type: trip
Photoarchive: /rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/
Thumbl: IMG_0667--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: IMG_0666--thumb.jpg
Authors: Jarvist Frost, Jan Evetts
Cavepeeps: DATE=2004-11-27; CAVE=County Pot > Wretched Rabbit; PEOPLE=Dave Wilson, Jan Evetts, Jack Garrett-Jones, Nicholas Loh
           DATE=2004-11-27; CAVE=Top Sink > Pool Sink; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, Joe King, Lester Loi;
	   DATE=2004-11-27; CAVE=Pool Sink > Top Sink; PEOPLE=Clewin Griffiths, Alvin Chow, Charles Collicutt;
	   DATE=2004-11-28; CAVE=Aygill Caverns; PEOPLE=Jan Evetts, Jack Garrett-Jones, Lester Loi, Alvin Chow, Nicholas Loh;
Oldurl: /rcc/caving/yorkshire/yorkshire-2004-11-26.php

<h3>
[Crouching, left to right] Jan Evetts, Charles Collicutt, Duncan
[Standing, left to right] Dave Wilson, Nicholas Loh, Jack Garrett-Jones, Alvin Chow, Joanna King, Lester Loi, Clewin Griffith  
[Notable only through his abscence] Jarvist Frost
</h3>

{!center}(/rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0667.JPG,/rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0667.html)

## Saturday

### County to Wretched Rabbit:- Dave W (super caver), Jan (not so supercaver), Jack (super fresher), Duncan (super fresher II), Nicholas (one thirdof the triads)

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo04.nick_countystream.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo04.nick_countystream.janevetts.html) 
{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo18.mainstream.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo18.mainstream.janevetts.html) 

Jack failed to befriend a
dog tied up by entrance, from a group going down just as we arrived, his
comforting words were met with a distinctly unamiable growl. we headed down
and took the obvious route after the first pitch - obvious but WRONG - so
after an hour or so's detour along some nice stream passage - with some good
photo opportunities - we were back to where we'd started. on track and we
arrived at the challenging vertical chimney that is known as poetic justice.

Further along, where county meets the lower end of WR, we met a lone caver, a
fairly common circumstance peculiar to easegill, we confirmed our location
with him.

After stomping upstream along the main streamway, crawling through low
bypasses and traversing massive boulder piles, we heard voices, it was clewin.
just following dave i wasn't paying much attention to our route, but i was
surprised. not as surprised as clewin or dave though. "hello?" "hello??" "hang
on i wasn't expecting to meet you!", it was clear we had missed something,
that something being the enormous chamber known as stop pot key to upper and
lower easegill. personally i was finding this all very confusing, then
suddenly more lights appeared. "hello jarvist!". it was a meeting that
wouldn't have happened if you had planned it.

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo16.countygroup_mainstream.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo16.countygroup_mainstream.janevetts.html) 

We made our way out up the numerous climbs that characterise WR, and
picked up some very chilled cans of foster's outside the entrance. we struck
off across the moor back to bullpot farm in the dark and through thick fog,
luckily our route finding skills saw us home quickly. which is more than could
be said for some others...

Jan Evetts

  
  
<h3>
Top to Pool crossover:-  
In Top out Pool: Jarvist [would you follow this guy?], Jo, Lester  
In Pool out Top: Clewin, Alvin, Charles
</h3>

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0666--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0666.html) 

Treading familiar ground [we were here 3 weeks
previously]; we compensated for our late start by flinging ourselves
efficiently into the cave system. There was more than a little nip in the air;
where I had previously walked with unzipped furry + oversuit arms tied around
my waist, I was now fully suited up gloves 'n' all.

Entrance ladder was decidedly more drippy; oddly the streamway was
comparitively subdued. Navigation to the first pitch head was quick, Lester
seemed rather bemused by the constant squeeze - Jo barely noticed. Decided to
adapt a controversial top-of-pitch positioning for the descent of the
freshers, deciding that my efforts would be better spend making sure that
Descenders were rigged correctly than providing an emergency cushion.

Jo went first down Penknife Pitch [with instructions on how to reverse belay];
steady descent deftly avoiding the brunt of the waterfall. Lester followed at
a rather breakneck pace - temporarily worried that he was about to execute a
fresher-plummit, he seemed happily in control and completed the abseil faster
than I! I have a sneaky feeling he might have done this before while in the
Singaporian army...

The Second pitch was completed with similar ease, so we did our best to get
lost in the rather confusing section of streamway + oxbow beyond. Quite
labyrinthian; would start to get rather worried about ever getting out - were
it not for the many little red reflectors dotted along the exit route.
Unfortunately very little help when trying to get into the cave - but perhaps
thats for the best!

Jo saw the way on round the back of a boulder in the passageway where the
streamway drains noisily through a hole in the ground. We quickly tripped our
way along the fast flowing streamway down to Leprecaun junction - easy going
downhill, but the 1.5m drops can require a helping hand on the way out - the
smooth rock makes it difficult to chimney.

Resting momentarily to eat a cereal bar at the far-too-familar Leprecaun
junction [we had spent about an hour searching the 8 odd exits], we then
executed the upwards left-spiral climb. Long-legged Lester easily bridged his
way across, Jo was at rather a disadvantage. Not particularly liking the muddy
traverse if she went up the easier climb on the far-side and being pushed for
time for our meetup, I decided to try a spot of 'fresher throwing'.

Way on to Nagasaki chambers was easy; whereupon we heard voices + saw the
flash of headlights. Turned out to be a couple of rather terse cavers doing
some drilling up in the roof. They pointed the way on _through_ the large pile
of rocks that divide the chamber; I think I actually felt safer climbing right
over it last time.

Large holes that fall into the assembly room [location of the Jabberwocky
fight last time] provided entertainment as ever. Coupled to a fresher with
cow-tails, I'm not sure whether I'd be able to stop them if they did properly
slip through the hole. Quite romantic though; a plummit with just enough time
to admonish "FOR THE LAST TIME; MAKE SURE YOU JAM YOUR ELBOWS IN!".

Had a quick lie-down in the East Grotto and admired the stal + our snicker
bars. The two handline climbs were smoothly conquerered - though I swear that
the second handline actually makes the climb more difficult!

Once in the WhiteWay, we quickly followed it along to its low-termination,
then backed up very slightly to find the '_obvious way on_'. Not sure how we
managed to miss it last time; its on the left about 10m back from where the
stream becomes uncomfortably low.

Followed the dry but rather smelly easy-going passageway to the meetup spot
[Haldane junction?]. Heard voices - too many voices, and emerged to find both
the Wretched Rabbit crew + our other halves.

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo21.holbeckgroup.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo21.holbeckgroup.janevetts.html) 

Jan entertained
himself by flashing us a few times, as is his persistent want when
underground. Swapped a few navigation tips + stole all of Clew's krabs to
assist in the derig and began our ascent.

Was quite worried about navigation out of Pool - map looks distinctly crinkly
both before you get to Jacob's Ladder [first pitch] and after you get off the
last pitch. Nothing to worry about really; keep on the left on the way out to
get to Jacob's ladder - and after the last pitch simply follow the way that
looks vaguely possible for human-sized cavers.

Jacob's ladder was incredibly noisy; and rigged exceptionally wet. Due to
someone [ahem] not packing enough Maillons, we were rigging with a minimal
amount of metalwork - nowhere near enough to support the long P-bolt traverse
out of the Waterfall. Oh well. Spent a good few minutes shouting over the
noise of the spray, putting on hoods, tightening cuffs and checking SRT kit.

As ever, I stood at the bottom pulling rope through + trying to keep the
freshers as dry as possible. Which is fine and exactly what Caving is all
about - the more experienced sacrificing a little comfort to save the less
experienced a lot worse. However, Lester seemed absolutely determined + rather
skilled at kicking me in the face for as long as he was in range. If I ducked
his prussicking foot, his other would come wheeling around to clobber me on
the side; if he missed with the standing stroke, he'd manage to get a heel in
my teeth as he lifted up his hand jammer. Very surreal, but it did pass the
time.

Last bit of passageway involves a 2m freeclimb into a fairly tight crawl-
space. Secret of getting up was to gain sufficient height in the wider chamber
before trying to enter the much tighter v-shaped beginning of the crawlway.

Adopted normal tackle-bag dragging + person behind freeing technique. Would
have been very frustrating on the corners without someone behind to unhook the
anchor. Last dog-leg just before the entrance was horrendous for the long-
femur'ed; felt convinced when bending backwards that I was about to kick
myself in the back of the head.

Escaped into the dark, soft rain was quite refreshing. Navigation in the
valley was fine, but once up on the moors you hit the fog. Vis within the fog
banks was 4-10m, no chance of finding the post-markers back to bullpot. Walked
a bearing of 330 degrees from the Stile, passing over some distressing boggy
land - amusing to watch Jo suddenly disappear up to her waist with a far-too-
happy squel, considering the very serious risk of exposure if we got properly
lost. Walked back + forwards along stone wall until we found the trailer
marking the road to Bullpot. For future reference, on a 330 bearing we went
_over_ a slight hill, trailer was about 400m to the LEFT which was also mostly
downhill.

Only spent 90-odd minutes getting back, not bad considering we took 60 to
cross the moors in the daylight - but it was pretty grim at the time! In
between fogbanks, we could see lights - but was that Bullpot or the farm miles
across the Valley? Will o' the Wisp's to lead we poor cavers to our boggy
doom!

Jarvist Frost

After consuming nearly a gallon of pasta sauce, we roasted chestnuts by the-
modern-equivalent-of an open fire ie. an oven, and discovered the decadent
delights of baked bananas and nutella.

## Sunday

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo34.sunday_signpostandfurry.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo34.sunday_signpostandfurry.janevetts.html) 
{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo39.sunday_treesahdow.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo39.sunday_treesahdow.janevetts.html)
{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo38.sunday_farm.janevetts--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo38.sunday_farm.janevetts.html) 

Sunday morning
dawned cold, windy, but glorious. I ventured out to take photos while
breakfast was being prepared, and nearly froze my f^)$!*() tits off. Mind you,
it clearly wasn't the weather for wearing shorts.

{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0661--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0661.html) 
{!center}(/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0662--thumb.jpg,/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/IMG_0662.html) 

After breakfast the
creeping tendrils of apathy were working their evil magic, and I had to escape
the fester of cavers. Safely upstairs I found strength in '_Northern Caves
Three_'; and a description of Aygill caverns. When the announcement came, that
a party was going to a cake shop in Ingleton, I had the strength to resist the
mob and gather a crew of eager freshers.

### Aygill:- Jan (fearless leader), Jack (not doolittle), Alvin (2nd incommand and 1/3 of the triads), Lester (2/3 of the triads), Nicholas (3/3)

This is a great little cave, and good for beginners, some crawling, some
squeezing, 2 pitches and an impressive streamway. and the trip would have been
a lot smoother if hadn't put in a deviation from hell on the second pitch,
there was some struggling on the way out, with back prussiking and change
overs. executed very well, given the inexperience. and once again i failed to
pass the cascades at a very commiting waterfall climb.

Jan Evetts

* * *

Photos by [Jan](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/dirindex.html), [Jarvist](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jarvist/dirindex.html).

