Title: Yorks II
Date: 2005-11-25
Location: yorkshire
Summary: Desperate to go deep again, ICCC returned to Yorkshire. Frigging freezing; but Yorks managed to avoid the snow that was falling across North Wales & Cornwall. Alas, no photos, but a fine report instead.
Type: trip
Thumbl: /caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-05%20-%20yorkshire%20fireworks%20-%20jan/DSCF0004--thumb.jpg
Thumbr:/caving/photo_archive/trips/2004-11-26%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20jan/Photo38.sunday_farm.janevetts--thumb.jpg
Authors: Sandeep Mavadia, Dave Loeffler
Cavepeeps: DATE=2005-11-26; CAVE=Long Kin West; PEOPLE=Dave Wilson, Clewin Griffiths, Rik Venn, Jo King, Sandeep Mavadia, Dave Loeffler;
	   DATE=2005-11-27; CAVE=Heron Pot; PEOPLE=Dave Wilson, Clewin Griffiths, Rik Venn, Jo King, Sandeep Mavadia, Dave Loeffler;
Oldurl:/caving/yorkshire/yorkshire-2005-11-25.php

### Dave W, Gerardo, Hugo, Clewin, Rik, Jo, Daryl, Sandeep &amp; Dave L

## Saturday

Saturday morning brought the usual faff, a massive fry up was concocted for
the eight carnivores followed by hours of discussion of which caves to do that
day. The split was 5 to Kingsdale including our fresher, Hugo, and the
remaining 4 heading off to Lonkin West (which incidentally is nowhere near
Lonkin East).

### Lonkin West: Deep, Dave L, Rik, Clew

I had stolen Jarv's Peli case from stores but while we changed I realised that
I had forgotten my camera which was sitting frozen on my table in Fulham. I
would have no time for photos on this trip. During the rather elongated walk
to the cave I slide across several delicately frozen puddles hearing them
crack subtly under my weight, only for them to be ravaged by le Rik
immediately afterwards.

At the entrance, I asked 'What's the rigging like?' What I should have asked
was how long the pitch was, this was probably mentioned several times but I
was visualising alpine butterflies. Thankfully Clewin reminded me to attach my
descender to the rope before going too close to the edge. Just over the lip
was a y-hang point where I produced a figure - 8 and an alpine butterfly, only
to get tangled up in them before abseiling further. Approximately 30m below I
found the knot in the end of the rope, the first time I had seen the end of
the rope that I was abseiling on, unattached, fortunately there was also
p-hanger next to me which I tied this rope to and started on the new one. This
is where I really started to faff, dangling in mid-air with my three other
caving buddies waiting in the windswept, sub-zero temperatures above, I was
faced with a choice of five p-hangers on the opposing wall. Not thinking about
what was to come, I choose the two with no chance of finding any ledge to
stand on and hence almost guaranteeing getting caught by short cows tail as I
tried to leave. Being slightly confused by the muffled instructions bouncing
the 30m down the pitch towards me, I doubted my own judgement and ended up
loading a figure 8 on both ends. The entire section seemed to end in a cats-
cradle but I was finally free. As I slowly abseiled the remaining distance to
the shaft floor, carefully looking out for the final knot, I didn't realise
the temperature of my stop gradually rising as this dry rope slithered through
until the metal became hot through my glove and I had to make sure I was only
holding the plastic handle rather than anything metalic. Later that evening I
would realise that I actually burnt one of my fingers.

Dave followed after 'optimising' the rigging which included the occasional
real y-hang knot. I decided that taking an hour to rig a single pitch could
get slightly tedious for the others so I instructed Dave that would be that
end of my exploits for the day. Following this was one small pitch and a crawl
out to the second proper pitch which was another 50m.

At the bottom, we all scoffed some Tesco Value Christmas pudding and started
the 150 metres out in reverse order to the way we entered. The 60m free hang
on the entrance shaft gave for some interesting prussicing on the way out.
Next time must remember to take some nice blue Lanex that doesn't ever seem to
stretch. The heat generated by the time I reached surface was a great help in
shielding off the cold until Clewin appeared brandishing a half full tackle
sack.

A great trip, enjoyed by everyone and a great place to learn where to rig as
long as nobody tells you it's an 87m drop beforehand.

Deep

_Alternative Perspective from Dave L..._

It took us ages to find the place. Since I was the only one who'd been there
and my memory of that trip was rather hazy, I'd decided to bring my GPS,
thinking this meant that there was no way we could get lost. Alas, I copied
the coordinates out of Northern Caves 2 with two of the digits transposed, so
it indicated the cave being somewhere in the middle of the A65! After combing
the area of moor where I thought it was most likely to be for some while
without success, we bumped into a couple of other cavers from the Wessex, who
finally pointed us in the right direction. (Note for next time: the guidebook
says to follow the track from Cold Cotes and take the right fork at the first
junction. This is misleading. To get to the cave, go to the fork in the path,
then walk in a straight line more or less bisecting the two branches until you
reach a third, less obvious path.)

When we finally arrived, Sandeep went down to rig the monster 86m entrance
pitch, while the rest of us sat around on the surface (getting a bit chilly in
the wind). I followed with the second tackle sack, fine-tuning the rigging as
I went. The pitch is much less scary than you'd expect given its size; the
first 30m or so is in a fairly narrow rift so it doesn't feel too big, and
even the final hang below the second rebelay is comfortingly close to one
wall.

I met up with Sandeep at the bottom of the pitch, which is decorated with a
very, very dead, partially decomposed sheep and a whole load of old bones.
From here the cave becomes rather grotty for a while with a short drippy pitch
and an awkward crawling traverse to the final pitch, which is a fine shaft of
50m or so to a boulderous chamber. Nobody could be bothered to do the squalid
abandoned dig at the very bottom, so we sat and ate our Christmas Pudding and
prusiked out.

Dave L.

### Kingsdale, Bullpot &amp; Jingling: Dave W, Jo, Gerardo, Hugo, Darryl

## Sunday

### Heron Pot: Everyone!

No One Yet

* * *
