Title: CHECC 2017
Date: 2017-11-24
Location: yorkshire
Summary: This weekend was a trip like no other. Instead of 15 ICCC cavers heading to the NPC for a weekend of caving and mild debauchery, ~17 clubs from across the UK came together for a weekend of hard drinking (and maybe some caving/training). For anyone that doesn’t know, CHECC (Council for Higher Education Caving Clubs) “is a national organisation set up to support and encourage caving amongst university students”. They basically organise weekends of training (amongst other things) throughout the year where all the clubs come together to learn new skills and get very drunk. They also have lots of competitions which gain clubs points throughout the weekend and the club with the most wins a bunch of caving stuff. I’d say this weekend was basically a festival for university caving clubs and it was pretty good fun. - Diss \#TripleSec
Type: trip
Photoarchive:
Mainimg: DSC06787.jpg
Thumbl: DSC06785--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: DSC06768--thumb.jpg
Authors:Perry
Cavepeeps: DATE=2000-01-01; CAVE=A Cave > B Cave; PEOPLE=Caver A, Caver B, Caver C;
           DATE=2000-01-02; CAVE=C Cave; PEOPLE=Caver A, Caver B, Caver C;
Status: draft

{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}
##### {{ allpeople }}


##Friday
First thing’s first – cake baking! After I had a very rushed morning finishing a lab report to an appalling standard, Jennifer (aka best fresher) made the trek from Woodward to Fulham and we made a cake for the baking competition. Ambitiously, we had decided to make it look like a caving helmet and so had some red food dye to add to the icing. Our first problem hit when the cake was about half the height we had hoped – the tin was too wide. No matter, a slightly pancake-esque helmet would do just fine. I quickly looked like a scene from a bloody horror movie when I started adding food dye to the icing. Half a bottle of dye, a lot of icing sugar inhalation and a couple of hours later and it was done. You’ll have to check out the photos to see how amazing it looked. There were comments like “It’s like a piece of chewing gum” and “is that mud on the top?” so you can tell it was of high calibre. A slightly awkward bus journey with an oversized cake tub to South Kensington and we were in the back of the van in good time.

The journey was long, but the tunes were good, and we made it to our home for the weekend (a poo-filled field occasionally scattered with snow) by ~12:30. We got the tents up in the cold and quickly added several layers of clothing before grabbing our alcohol and making our way to the vague warmth of the rave room and non-rave room that I don’t have a name for. A drinking game I assume is called Simmy Simmy was introduced to us by Arun and this lead to much table banging, shouting and alcohol consumption. Another game that I can only describe as “voop voop” was started by yellow T-Shirt guy (later to be called Patrick from an unknown caving club) and we were left with a very drunk Arun. Water was consumed, and he seemed ok. I can’t say I remember many specifics about the night, but we drank and chatted and there was some wrestling and attempts at table traverse. In bed by about 5 without feeling too ill.
####Diss


## Saturday

### A Cave to B Cave: {{ DATE=2000-01-01; CAVE=A Cave > B Cave; }}

{"A description of the image." left}(DSC06733.jpg)

{"A description of the image." right}(DSC06733.jpg)

{"A description of the image." center}(DSC06733.jpg)

Awake at the usually fine but now ungodly hour of 9.30am to realise that Arun is in Peter’s sleeping bag with him. Neither of them are sure how this happened but it appears that Arun came in very late and, expecting his sleeping bag to be where Peter was lying, dived in and slept without a second thought. Not a bad idea really - it was bloody cold. We queued for a saddening amount of time for a cooked breakfast including hash browns which made me sort of want to vomit (not because it wasn’t at least vaguely tasty; I blame the alcohol) but this passed quickly, and I was ready to get on with the day.

Several of us were disorganised and hadn’t booked a spot on any of the training sessions so we were doomed to a day of caving instead. After talking Tanguy down from dragging us all to King Pot which is in Not for The Faint Hearted (stressing to him that this was Jennifer’s first ever SRT trip…), we headed to East Kingsdale. Five of us (Rhys, Ben, Arun, Jennifer, and I) were Vespers-bound whilst the remaining three lunatics (Tanguy, Alex and Mr Jack – the aCHECCxuals) went to King. The walk is horrible thanks to a stupidly steep hill but it’s not too long and it actually made me want to get in the cave. I’d been to Vespers before as one of my first few SRT trips during Winter Tour, so was keen to see what it was like from vaguely more experienced eyes. I also had a pantin with me for the first time so was pretty psyched for the ascent. Rhys was our designated rigger and the rest of us followed behind.

The entrance to the cave is a small hole that you insert yourself into and then there is a pretty awful, albeit short, section of tight passage with some crawling. It then opens out in a streamway where you can move to hands and knees. This eventually widens, and you can walk for a bit before it gets tight and climbing up and traversing seems to be the best move.

The first pitch is an interesting one, you end up in a rift above the pitch with no traverse line and so have to wedge yourself before rigging your descender onto the first section of rope. This actually looks like a traverse line because it goes around the corner and you don’t see how vertical the rope gets. It’s possible that this is the place I did a descent as a traverse on my first trip (it’s not too big a drop so it was fine) but I’m not sure. There’s quickly a rebelay and you’re out of the scary bits. I was in front of Jennifer so stayed behind after each pitch to make sure she was okay and knew the way on. Arun was behind (A Jennifer sandwich) and could help with all the technical bits. Nothing too terrifying happened on the way down and we had decided not to do the final pitch (because effort) so headed out, Arun and a flash first. Jennifer followed with another flash and posed on the pitch for Rhys to take some photos. It was getting pretty cold, so I was eager to get on the rope.

**Pantins are great apart from when they get caught on tackle sack cords at the top of tight pitch heads and you get stuck in a precarious position for far too long, but I wouldn’t know anything about that.**

Some more cave happened, and I was back in the lovely tight passage. I ended up lying on my back in a pool of water but whatever, I was getting warm anyway. This was an especially irritating section as I was just completely the wrong height to fit through standing, and going low didn’t work because there was a tight bend and I hadn’t really thought to try climbing higher. Instead I got steadily more annoyed at myself until Rhys arrived and provided moral support (I was very irritable at this point, sorry Rhys), after which I was through in a matter of minutes. I carried on, eventually meeting Jennifer and Arun sitting in the low passage we had agreed to wait at near the entrance. We waited for maybe ten rather cold uncomfortable minutes before Rhys appeared, along with the knowledge that Ben had dropped the rope down a pitch so was having to re-rig to fetch it. We moved onto tackle sacks to stay warm and huddled until Ben was done before heading out. The tight bits were strangely easier on the way back. As was the walk to the minibus in terms of tiring-ness, but much colder and more painful. I was slightly worried as we approached the road because I could see no minibus lights, suggesting the King group weren’t out yet. We had planned to meet back at 6pm (we were slightly late) because Tanguy was meant to be giving a talk at CHECC, so them not being back wasn’t great news. We changed and continued to worry but eventually saw three lights in the distance. Tanguy missed his talk but everyone was fine.

We made it back to CHECC as dinner was being served. The queue was horrific, so we decided to just sit and drink until it died down – this wasn’t until after 9, grumble grumble. Polystyrene trays filled with jacket potato and chilli was on the menu. What it didn’t have in taste they at least tried to make up for in quantity.

After the piles of food were at best partially consumed, we were ready for the real fun to begin – Caving games! First off was human traverse which Rhys and Arun did pretty darn quickly. We then moved to the squeeze machine – from ICCC Rita was out first, closely followed by Jennifer and I. Arun, with his non-existent hips and generally small build was there until the very end, coming in (I think) third place. Arun and I were also doing the pot and sling game at the same time. We were distracted by squeezing so missed the first two rounds but easily completed round 3 without too much stress. We were mistaken for Nottingham cavers as we were both misleadingly wearing Nottingham T-Shirts but I took mine off to reveal our true colours (a bright orange ICCC T-Shirt). I think we made it to round five before being beaten purely by size, we were seriously stable and weren’t falling any time soon but that sling would not budge. That put us in joint second place which I am happy with. I also found out that the ‘get up and hug’ rule is an ICCC thing and so we didn’t have to do that here but we did anyway because we have mad skills.

**\*Meanwhile in Jennifer-land, almost an entire bottle of sloe gin was being consumed.\***

Next, a beer pong tournament. It was Peter and Jay vs (I think) SUSS and we definitely lost but not without dignity. Lots of alcohol had been consumed by now and we moved on to the Perry. The next memorable event was Jennifer looking a bit worse for wear. We sat down in the non-rave room and DKP provided water, Peter a plastic tub and I a shoulder to pass out on. There was some vomit, the details of which I know all too well. Who’d have thought it would be so warm? Thankfully I know this from being the tub holder, and not from being thrown up on. Peter, the wise man that he is, emptied it down the sink which remained full of chilli and terrible things the rest of the night. He appeared with a new tub (where were they coming from?!) and we encouraged a relocation to the tent. A slow staggered walk supported by Dave and I and we were in, left to attempt to undo the laces of Jennifer’s shoes. Apparently Dave doesn’t understand how this works and so just fully unthreaded most of them. Ah well, that was sober Jennifer’s problem. She somehow took her contact lenses out (at first dropping one) and then passed out on me. I stayed in the tent for a bit so I could line my stomach with crisps and hummus before rolling her into the recovery position and heading back to the party.

Things got decidedly CHECCy and we were all topless in the rave room dancing to terrible music and the occasional Scooter song that we had to harass the DJ several times for. Lots of people got on other people’s shoulders for a higher level of raving and I ended up on Peter’s for a brief time – I was pretty scared and made lots of high pitched squeaks and held on to his hair for dear life before begging to be let down. Much Perry was consumed straight from the tap – it’s far to easy to drink. Since we started on the alcohol about 5 hours earlier than the previous night, sleep called at around 4am.

#### Diss

## Sunday

### C Cave: {{ DATE=2000-01-02; CAVE=C Cave; }}

We had a nice wakeup call from Jennifer **(\*Wretch* \*Wretch* \*Spew*)** at roughly the time we should have been getting up. Shockingly she didn’t seem anywhere near as hungover as she should’ve been after that. I was the first to get fully up, having no hangover whatsoever, but the rest eventually followed, excluding Peter who remained dead to the world for quite some time. Another morning of chilled eating and chat before the AGM which really dragged on. It was good fun but we had planned to go caving at 12pm so we had to leave before the end. Arun, Rhys and Ben stayed behind whilst the rest of us joined a fully PVC’d Tanguy in Alum, which he and Alex had already rigged. We were pretty late in the cave – I think later than 2pm. Peter went down the terrifying outdoor root, rigged from a tree, whilst Tanguy lead the rest of us through the indoor route. I was happy to find that the annoying free climb had been rigged with a hand line which would make it much easier to ascend on the way out. Tanguy went ahead once we reached the first pitch and I helped the novices with the pitch head which was slightly awkward. The Y hang was pretty far from the ledge you could stand on so you ended up with two options 1) hang on cowstails in the Y hang to rig your descender, then pull up using arm strength to remove short or 2) rig descender low down on the rope whilst standing on the ledge and have cowstails clipped into the traverse line, then just test whilst standing. In hindsight I suppose we could have used method 1 and wrapped the rope around our feet to stand and remove the cowstails but oh well. Jay and Tanguy opted for method one whilst Rita, Jennifer and I went with method 2. This did mean you ended up with a vaguely scary swing when you lowered yourself onto your descender but they managed it well. Once we got to the great outdoors there was some confusion about what we should be doing but it was eventually decided that there wasn’t time for us to descend any further so we needed to head out. Some disappointed mumbles from many of us were interrupted by the unexpected appearance of Rhys, who had realised that he desperately wanted to be in a cave so got a lift there with Dave.

We started the ascent, Jennifer first, followed by me and the others. We weren’t 100% sure of the route back so waited for Rhys to double check. We decided to try out the other exit which quickly brought us to a pool of unknown depth. Rhys traversed around the edge, which did look a little slippy. Jennifer, having some aversions to water due to lack of swimming practice, was a bit dubious and didn’t want to cross without knowing how deep it was (in case she fell in). I, being the awesome human that I am, went in the middle of the pool to find out. It was probably knee height where I was and perhaps a bit deeper where there weren’t so many rocks. This seemed satisfactory and Jennifer and the rest of us crossed without any casualties. Pretty soon after, we reached another pool which was much deeper and involved a climb on the other side that meant turning back if we found more water later would be very difficult without falling in. We decided that me going back out the other way with Jennifer was the best course of action. This was actually really nice as I had my first practice at being a proper leader and we didn’t get lost. We met up with the others on the surface and headed back to the minibus for a nice muddy change.

A quick stop at the NPC to drop of the aCHECCers and all the kit so it could be repacked, and we went back to CHECC to sort out our tents and pick up Arun and Ben. Thankfully they had packed everything away and we were quickly on the way back to London via the NPC for a quick snack and minibus filling. There was a long game of contact before an hour or so napping and we were back at around 12.30am.

Overall CHECC is good fun - lots of games and drinking plus the T-Shirts which are awesome. Not sure how much better it is than the regular trips we have had this term but i'll definitely be going back, if only to try and get rid of Imperial's apparent reputation for being antisocial. 

PS. Take toilet roll to CHECC because it runs out far too quickly

PPS. Pour sick down toilets, not sinks <3

#### Diss

