Title: Yorkshire V Rescue
Date: 2016-02-20
Location: Yorkshire
Summary: 
Type: trip
Photoarchive:
Mainimg: 
Thumbl:  
Thumbr: 
Authors: Arun Paul, Cecilia Kan, Rhys Tyers
Cavepeeps: 	DATE=2016-02-20; CAVE=It's a Cracker > Boxhead Pot; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Will Scott, Edith Huebner, Kenneth Tan;
			DATE=2016-02-20; CAVE=Boxhead Pot > It's a Cracker; PEOPLE=Rhys Tyers, Kevin Choi, Cecilia Kan, Arun Paul, Dave Kirkpatrick;
Status:
Unlisted:		

{{ mainimg }}
#####{{ allpeople }}

This is an account of CRO incident 9/2016.

## Saturday


### {{DATE=2016-02-20; CAVE=Boxhead Pot > It's a Cracker; }}

My team, Cecilia, Arun, Kevin and DKP, followed on a little way behind Jack’s group on the way to the caves. Walking right past Lost John’s and along a relatively subtle path brings you to the South side of a fenced enclosure, the entrance to Lost Pot. As we got there Jack waved us over. Boxhead was the obvious concrete tube sticking out of the adjacent shakehole. 

We hurried down and I got to work rigging. There was already a rope in and we were afraid that someone else was pirateing. At least it made spotting the bolts a lot easier. I secured the rope and dropped down the tube, immediatedly dangling above a waterfall with no sight of a floor. The route down involves an immediate Y-hang, in the sloping rift of the roof, to stay out of the water. Dropping past this a deviation serves the same purpose. The whole way down Boxhead you skirt along the waterfalls, just in the spray.

At the bottom of the first pitch is a loose steeply sloping pebbly floor which surprisingly had a sheet of water running across it down into the next pitch. Above me I could hear the clatter of metal and rope and occasional flashes of light as Kevin followed. I rigged along the wall to the next pitch-head and sat for a while dangling off it as Kevin approached. As he did I descended again. 

Here I think the rigging topo suggests a deviation, and a y-hang in the rift before dropping onto the Kendal flyover. I think I ended up with 3 deviations and 3 rebelays before getting down (including an acrobatic mid-air rope refueling from Kevin). I reached the flyover, and noticed lights. Awfully quiet for Jack, I thought. As I approached it became quite clear that it wasn’t our other party. Pirates!

I arrived next to them, my rope running out half a metre above the floor, requiring a small amount of ballet to get the rope off (I assume the “pirates” were impressed by my exact rope length). It turns out the pirates were in fact diggers which I think is fair enough. Trying to make new cave is a worthy exploit. There were a few of them, and me, on quite a small ledge. Along with a huge amount of piping and tools (including a pipe collecting water from It’s A Cracker used to blast a choked streamway clear of mud!) it was pretty crowded. They were heading out so I decided to wait for them. They kept appearing though, one by one, out of the small crawl in the wall. Before even half of them had gotten out Jack appeared in a rift above and was quickly down the bottom of the shaft. I inched my way round them and rigged a very dodgy traverse round all the piping.

I dropped the last 10m hang and amongst the wind and spray at the bottom it was decided to get the It’s A Cracker rope landing straight onto the flyover. I prussicked up and tied their rope off to accomplish this. One by one Jack’s team arrived, and one by one the diggers left. We got going as well. I had to do another dodgy traverse as Kenneth had (corrctly) derigged my last one. Keen to get moving again I shot up the rope first, quickly shouting some instructions about bags to Kevin and Arun and demonstrating the correct method for getting onto the bottom of a rope with a big swing.

I climbed. I got to the top. I found the pitc-hhead quite twatty. Sort of a rift with no floor that bellows out. I struggled for a while and even managed to get my handjammer stuck up against the knot (classic fresher mistake) and had to untie the knot a little bit to get it off. I had second thoughts at this point about abandoning DKP with the derigging and Kevin and Arun with the bags so I called “Rope free” and waited. Cecilia was very quickly up the rope and managed the pitch-head incredibly gracefully. I told her about my change of plan, that I would now help DKP derig and she should head out with the others. I told her the way on was up the boulder slope and up ahead would be a waterfall with a rope in and off she went.

Following the pitchead there a small upwards squeeze into a waterfall aven. A boulder slope leads up, doubling back on the squeeze into a large passage at the end of which another waterfall is visible. Cecilia got through and I could see her light flick back and for. I asked whether she could see the rope yet (I didn’t really know how far it would be) and she shouted something back that I didn’t hear but it wasn’t repeated and her light faded so I assumed she’d found it.

Arun came up next and the same thing was repeated. Kevin was next and at some point I heard Arun shout “Okay” I assume in response to an unheard “Rope Free” from Cecilia. I sent Keving ahead. telling him to wait at the second tackle sack he saw to collect  a bag. I waited for DKP. DKP was fairly slow, not having caved in a while and not having derigged in a while but I waited happily enough. He arrived at the top and began to derig the traverse. I wriggled through the squeeze and waited on the other side in the aven. At this point Kevin shouted “Rope Free”. I didn’t really pay attention to where the sound had come from (and this is always tricky in caves anyway) but I think perhaps at that point Kevin would’ve been almost directly above me. I shouted back “Okay”.

DKP came through and we wandered up the slope. Sighting in the distance the bottom of a another waterfall. We headed towards it. There was a psychologically tricky climb (easier than it looked) that I was impressed everyone had done (it turns out they hadn’t) that Dave and I dithered at for a minute or two. Once at the next aven the rope was visible, under the waterfall as promised. I wasted no time in prussicking. I was absolutely soaked withing seconds though.

I got to the top and stood on the very small ledge between the first and second pitches. They are right next to each other and I was expecting Kevin to be here. He wasn’t there but then neither was a second tackle sack (I had already taken the first from DKP). I looked around thinking it was odd to have left it at the top of such a long pitch. Finally I pulled on the rope to find the tackle sack completely submerged behind a waterfall. I cursed myself for using the tacklesack as a reference, I should’ve said top of the next pitch, assuming that Kevin had missed it (as I had nearly done) and gone ahead.

Dave arrived, and we discussed our plans for getting three bags out. I went up with the first bag and at the top wiggled my way across the scary waterfall and up the funny squeeze to the entrance chamber, dumping my bag there. I went back to the pitch head to wait for DKP. When he arrived I helped pull up the pitch rope and took the second bag, leaving him to pack the third. I wiggled up the waterfall, went through the squeeze and dumped the second bag in the entrance chamber. DKP called for assistance and I went back through, helped him get his bag up the waterfall then went back through the squeeze. Finally I went half way back in to take the final bag off DKP when he’d finished derigging. 

We were both quite cold and wet. DKP very cold and very wet after derigging in several waterfalls. We were relieved to be on the surface in daylight, though with a heavy fog. The Lost Pot enclosure was just visible and we skirted round, finding the path and headed back to the van. On the road just past Lost John’s we met Jack who asked where the rest of my group were. I laughed and said I wasn’t falling for that one. (Obviously now) It wasn’t a joke. DKP and I headed back to shout into the wind a bit, assuming they’d got lost on the fell. 

I was adamant that they couldn’t be in the cave as I had heard them getting on the “second” pitch and there is nowhere beyond there to get stuck. In hindsight we should’ve begun rerigging the cave at this point even whilst someone called for the CRO for fell searching.

Dave and I wandered around It’s A Cracker as night fell, our visibility dropping all the time. I blew my whistle a lot. Jack and Kenneth joined us and we quickly decided that even we couldn’t hear each other over the wind over a small distance and the visibility had dropped to a few metres. We marched back to the van and Jack made the call.

My second experience of the CRO was much like the first. Their response is speedy and professional but jolly all the time. The rozzers not so much. I’m sure the others will relay their experiences of the Blue Man’s Group’s involvement in the rescue but it mostly consisted of walking back and forth relaying wrong, unnecessary, and vaguely racist information around. They made up for it with enthusiasm though. The blues and two’s could be seen far off in the distance racing up and down in beautiful and meaningless patterns.

#### Rhys

The waterfalls were loud, the little landing was crowded, Jack was telling Rhys something about awful deviation, but the exact content was hard to catch. I had come down the waterfall in Boxhead Pot, and was waiting for an exchange into It’s a Cracker. Some friendly diggers were popping out one by one from an odd opening in the wall, ascending their white ropes next to our orange ones as they had done their work for the day.

Finally Jack’s group had all made it to our shore. One of them was confused which rope to use, so Jack confirmed the smart bright orange one belonged to ICCC. Meanwhile the plan for our exit was announced: Arun and Kevin got tackle sacks to carry, DKP got ropes to derig, I got nothing. I followed Rhys across Kendal Flyover ledge, through the traverse, then a bit of a crawl, to find him at the edge of the reach of a waterfall’s spray, some boulders behind him slope upwards to a passage. He asked me to go on. I should go on a slope on my left, and expect a rope waiting in a waterfall. It would be quite a long hang, so I should head up and wait for him at the top. I aimed naturally for the obvious slope, but walked around a loop in attempt to avoid the spray above head, in vain. Rhys teased my wail as I scampered up the wet muddy rocks, and asked, “Can you see the rope?” Was I expected to spot it here? I turned around to reply, and surely enough, my light illuminated a red rope in the waterfall, so well-camouflaged against the brown wall I did not even noticed its presence when I walked right past it. As if a timely encouragement, Rhys left me with the words, “Go on,” before he disappeared back into the crawl. I approached the rope, grabbed it out of the waterfall, and took it with me up some narrow steps the rocks had kindly provided on the left of the waterfall to save me some effort in ascending. The rope in my hand was unlike the shiny new ones I abseiled down, which Jack’s group did not seem to had the chance to use, but it was not the diggers’ white rope either. There wasn’t any secret corner where another party could have hidden, so it must be ours. Everything fitted the description.

Up I went. It was a very long hang. 30-40m? At last I reached a rebelay, and what rusty mallions Jack had picked! I observed the bolt hangers; they were fine.  I examined the mallions; they had a thin layer of brown on the surface where they were not in contact with the hanger, but not in poor condition otherwise. I took that as an OK signal to move on. Was this the deviation Jack was talking about? It was indeed awful! It was an orange krab suffering an awful skin rash in the form of huge white blobs. I stared uncertainly at the krab. An in-situ deviation? That was unheard of, but then there were so many things I had not heard of. There was something ominous about the roaring of a hidden waterfall above head, there was something wrong, and I was a bit shaken. Sometimes, with a lot of wishful thinking, we fail to react to situations we face as we subconsciously try to stick to our usual routines.

Dismissing the uneasy feeling, I continued on. The rope was now a white one, which led me onto a landing, then around and up. Lacking that proximity to the bolt when tackling a rebelay, I overlooked the rope was attached to a heavily rusting P-bolt instead of a hanger. The final ascend was a short one that ended in a bit tight space with a waterfall. The end of a rope was usually taken as a sign of safety, so I unclipped myself, and moved in the only possible direction: upwards and backwards. The “wriggle” I was searching for must be an extremely thin crack as I could not see any possible route on, but the rope had to be rigged by someone coming from above. Best to let Rhys make the judgement.

As I started to retreat, I soon realised I was almost above Arun, and my foot holds were all thin sheets of rock that crumbled as I removed my weight from them. “Rock! Rock!” I screamed, as I backed my way down in a panic, desperate to clip myself back onto the rope. Arun did not seem to be able to hear my words on top of the waterfall, and looked as if he was grabbing the rope to prepare for ascend. I seized the rope, reached to fetch my descender which was packed away in my SRT bag, only to discover in horror that my hand jammer was not attached to my shock cord. Nightmare entailed. I made it back to the landing, next to a confused Arun, and all the signs that we were in the wrong place finally dawned on me. I clung onto my final hope that Rhys would come up after Arun, while he suggested that I could check the tag on the rope. That forced the truth on me, and Kevin turning up instead of Rhys forced the reality on me.
 
It was now pitch black below us. I sent us down. Landed right in the middle of the waterfall, I fished up the tail of the rope under my foot. The tag was a yellow circle. Arun went to check on the waterfall at the end of the passage, but it was too late. No sign of any rope. I took off my helmet, and removed the survival bag from it. I tried to recall what I had learnt in the past; I told the others to wrap themselves up as well, to eat chocolate bars before they were hungry, to keep themselves hydrated with the waterfalls, to star-jump before they got cold. We stayed in a dry, non-drafting bit of the passage, where there were little gap between boulders. Kevin thought of sitting on his kneepads when I told them they would best be insulated from the rock we were sitting on. He also had a spare light so I suggested everyone turn off his helmet light to conserve battery. It was 16:20 when we were all settled down. It could be a short wait if Rhys and DKP turned back when they saw no one had taken any tackle sack, or when they found us absent on the surface. It could also be hours’ wait if they rejected the possibility we were left behind.

How would they feel about exiting with the diggers’ ropes? Kevin asserted the traverse line at the head of the flyover was derigged, and he did not want to risk getting stuck at a deviation. Arun preferred staying in case Rhys and DKP returned for us. Fair enough. We chatted, danced a bit in our survival bag. Half an hour past, an hour past, Arun shared with me his experience with half a contact lens left in his eye so he had to rub it out. Throughout this time I had not forgotten about the ropes in Boxhead Pot as my worries ate me. How long would the survival bags keep us from being cold? I was fine in my PVC but the others’ fabric oversuits were soaked. Would the weather on the surface turn the water in the cave into impediment for any rescue? The two “wriggles” did not sound good for cave rescue if we became immobile from hypothermia either. At times I asked about the traverse line again, and Kevin would reassure me the rope was derigged. I told myself I should check the traverse with my own eyes, but my fear that I would commit to an exit held me back. Every decision was too scary to make.

At around 18:00 I tossed my survival bag aside and took off my SRT bag with the first aid kit inside to leave them to the guys. No one would be coming for us too soon. Sitting in the hut with a heart-warming cup of tea it was easy to say staying put was the right decision; In the depth of the cave, it was extremely hard to forgive myself for not taking the opportunity to make contact with the outside world before the cold could paralyse us. The other two were not in an imminently dangerous situation, and could keep each other company as well. I tried to convince them that I was confident about exiting the cave alone, that I could perhaps speed the rescue up, but Arun and Kevin were more obstinate. They were very optimistic and composed. Arun was even feeling bad for those on the surface worry about us when we are unharmed. The courage I so difficultly summoned up dispersed. Defeated, I hooded myself with the survival bag again.

We sang “On the Surface Once Again”, “The Hanging Tree”, followed by a cave rave with Kevin’s flashing torch. Putting all other thoughts aside, a long patient wait commenced. Rather than simply preventing our temperature from dropping further, the unremarkable survival bags allowed us to gradually warm up, but time was using up our tunes. Kevin predicted his torch would last another hour. Well, we would still have our helmet light. Gradually we fell silent, and reclined into a huddle to share warmth and consolation. I am tremendously grateful I was not bearing the cost of my negligence alone.

It was at such a moment when the first distant “woohoo” arrived. It had been close to 5 hours since we were abandoned. We jumped up. We “woohoo-ed” back so many times, in case they lost us again. I had Kevin flash his torch at the waterfall as well as the rift above us to signal our location. The cave rescue organisation was very swift to send us up. One person came down for us, and gave us clear instructions to shout “rope free” loudly at the top of every pitch. At the head of each pitch, we were guided on by a caver. I finally had my go at the wriggles. They were fun once you have learnt how to approach them, though how did Rhys and DKP make through with three tackle sacks to carry between them?
 
I skipped a bit and sang On the Surface Once Again on the walk back. We were greeted with blue flashes, lovely fluffy dog, warm drinks, and food. “You have no idea the scale of the search,” we were told. Lots of people ushered us to keep warm in the car. I recognised a lady we encountered in Boxhead Pot who invited us to have a poke in their dig. They told us it was perhaps the rope to Lost Pot we went up. Fortunately that path was sealed quite early on. All could have gone horribly wrong if I was able to explore further in the wrong direction. It was so good to be back above ground.

Profuse thanks to the all the people who contributed to our rescue, the Yorkshire Cave Rescue Organisation, the lady who spent her birthday helping us back to the surface, everyone on this Yorkshire trip, Kevin, and Arun.

#### Cecilia

Woke up. At breakfast it was decided that rather than going down as two teams of 6, DW was going to lead 3 others to Routon*? Leaving 9 of us. I was in the group entering Boxhead with Rhys, Cecilia, Dave KP and Kevin. Jack lead the team entering It’s a Cracker! with Kenneth, Will Scott and Edith. 

Those 9 of us left in the minivan, driving through some fairly heavy fog on the fells and entered into the entrances for around 12ish. My only in-cave SRT experience was descending down into Easegill through Lancaster pot so I was excited for his trip. The descent was pretty wet and my old fabric oversuit and furry were busy absorbing as much water as possible. As we approached the bottom we exchanged with a group of diggers and then at the bottom after a brief chat and some hot blackcurrant squash (with loads of added sugar) we swapped with Jack’s group. It was agreed that Dave would bring up the rear and derig. Rhys showed us the correct way to cross the Kendal Flyover and Cecilia followed him, then myself and Kevin behind me.

On the other side of the flyover, Rhys informed me that he was going to help Dave with the derigging, that Cecilia was ahead of me and to continue up. He explained the way ahead ‘Up through the squeeze, left and up the slope’ I repeated this back to him, and asked where to wait for them. ‘Just carry on up’ were the words my ears heard and now memory recalls… To which he continued ‘what could go wrong, it’s just an ascent up through a waterfall’. I carried on forward with his explanation, what COULD go wrong?

I continued to a waterfall, looked around and saw a slope up to one side. As I headed up this I looked around and I saw a head-torch beam dancing around in the waterfall behind me and then heard Cecilia’s shout of ‘rope free!’ I looked behind the waterfall and found the rope, thought to myself ‘Ah, Rhys must have said up the rope, not slope’ despite the fact I had repeated slope back to him and he had confirmed.[*1] I ascended slowly up the ~20m? rope, managed a tricky rebelay and stood up in a shallow pool with Cecilia further up the rope on a continuation above me. I shouted down to Kevin, who began his ascent up. Cecilia shouted something down to me that was unintelligible due to the noise of all the water so I stood back and waited for another signal from her. She descended down ~5m told me the shock cord on her hand-jammer has come undone. As she re-tied it we she said that she was unable to find the way on and then indicated that the maillons were rusted and can’t have been our kit.[*2] Neither of us had checked the labelling on the rope at the bottom of the pitch. As Kevin got to the top with us he shouted down ‘rope free’ and we received a (very quiet) response from below. I peered down the pitch and saw that no one was waiting to ascend so we paused up at the top waiting for Rhys to come up and find the way on, or confirm that this wasn’t the way (which in hindsight is so obvious it hurts). I looked below again and saw 2 head-torch beams looking around, and assumed on of them was about to head up our pitch [*3]. 

When I next looked after a maybe 5 minutes it became clear neither of them were ascending up, we had been overtaken and our shouts down the pitch were unanswered. We descended, me first. When I got to the bottom my calls to Rhys and Dave were still unanswered. I waited for Cecilia and then Kevin to descend. Here we realise we may have been derigged in front of. I headed further up the slope, saw there was another waterfall but failed to find a rope there. Calling upwards was again unanswered. Personally I felt undaunted as we assumed we wouldn’t be stuck long. Our theory was that once Rhys & Dave got to the surface and found we weren’t at the entrance or the minibus they would realise we would be at the bottom of the cave and eventually rig down and find us. We got our survival bags (10/10. Would recommend to a friend/stranded caver) from our helmets out and started chatting, singing, keeping warm and spirits up. A couple of hours in Cecilia suggested trying to leave back up the diggers’ ropes up Boxhead Pot. Both me and Kevin were opposed to this, especially as a traverse line had been derigged making it sketchy. She then suggested going out that way herself but eventually we decided to stay put in the most obvious place, keeping dry. As it got later we realised that Rhys & co had not decided to rig straight back down and that we now didn’t have any idea how long it may be until we were found. I went for a piss down the slope into the water, when I returned the other two were huddled together and were quieter, fatigue and cold were affecting us.

About an hour later we heard a very faint ‘ayoooo’ from the direction of the correct waterfall. We jumped up and tried to reply, all three of our voices cracked! We replied back and got a response, kept this communication up for around 20 minutes intermittently. I was watching the waterfall when I saw the first of the CRO team descend so fast I thought he had dropped his torch. It took us maybe slightly under an hour to get out of the cave, the CRO members insisting the coldest go first and to just keep heading out. We were all tired but made it out under our own steam, guided by the 3 CRO members in the cave. I had trouble with my foot-loop tightening up over my wellies as I prussiked, and re-tied it mid ascent. 

When we reached the surface we were informed of how everyone above ground was adamant we were also above ground and lost on the fells due to the awful weather conditions and were also told of the extent of the search, feeling humbled by it. This was a possibility we had not even considered when at the bottom of the cave. As they CRO organised everything, standing down a coastguard helicopter that was enroute, they fed us and gave us hot drinks to warm us up. We were driven back to the NPC to meet everyone there, who didn’t know we were safe, making our entrance significant.

We three had long, warm showers, ate and exchanged our sides of the stories with everyone else. Jack assisted me with finishing a bottle of red wine and then we headed up to sleep at around 2am.
Just some notes about where I think the main mistakes on my part were:
[*1] – I ascended the rope without first checking the label on the rope. Not a mistake I will make again.
[*2] –We should have just descended straight down when we recognised this, obviously it wasn’t the way.
[*3]- I cannot stop kicking myself for this, had I shouted down the pitch they would have known where we were, we would have descended down and would have prevented what happened.

#### Arun