Title: Yorkshire V
Date: 2017-02-10
Location: Yorkshire
Summary: Unencumbered by most of the committee, a mean, lean team set off from London in a dodgy minibus with one goal &mdash; to cave until we could cave no more. On Saturday Tanguy lead us on a mad dash from Top Sink through to Stake Pot, where a photography group peeled off to the Colonnades and exited out Lanc, whilst the rest of the group endured the Link Crawl and exited via Mistral. On Sunday we tackled the glories of Alum and the thrutchy majesty of Washfold, and rescued a bunch of Scouse doggers from a blizzard.
Type: trip
Photoarchive:
Mainimg:
Thumbl:
Thumbr:
Authors: Jack Hare, Ryan Clark, Tanguy Racine, James Wilson;
Cavepeeps: DATE=2017-02-11; CAVE=Top Sink>Lancaster Hole; PEOPLE=Rhys Tyers, Rebecca Diss, Ryan Clark;
           DATE=2017-02-11; CAVE=Top Sink>Mistral Hole; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, Tanguy Racine, David Wilson, James Wilson;
           DATE=2017-02-12; CAVE=Alum Pot; PEOPLE=Jack Hare, David Wilson, James Wilson, Ryan Clark, Rebecca Diss;
           DATE=2017-02-12; CAVE=Washfold Pot; PEOPLE=Tanguy Racine, Rhys Tyers;
Status: draft

{{ mainimg }}
{{ photolink }}
#####{{ allpeople }}

##Friday

##Saturday

On Saturday morning, after a large breakfast (smaller numbers = more food!), we drove out to Casterton Fell on the Easegill system. The weather was cold and snowy, so we were anxious to get into the caves and out of the wind. After about a 45 minute hike from the minibus and through Easegill Beck, we arrives at the entrance at Top Sink which consisted of a well-used hole with a surprisingly stable ladder going down into the caving area. The caverns of the cave initially consisted of tight walls, winding endlessly to the SRT zone. After rappelling down an underground waterfall, we found ourselves in some large caverns. The latter two-thirds of the cave consisted of moderately large caverns and passageways involving an extensive degree of traversing.  At Stake Pot we decided to split as Rhys, Rebecca and I took a shorter (and much drier) diversion to the exit. Overall the cave was a great experience and could be compared to the caves in Wales due to the high degree of traversing.  

####Ryan

Having got up and eaten some breakfast, we finally started thinking about caves. Someone suggested doing top sink to mistral, suggesting that it would be a really good trip. Not really acknowledging how long a ‘10-12 hour’ trip really was, I agreed, eager to try out the new route. After much faff and realising I had forgotten my chest harness, we began the walk to top sink which felt a lot shorter now I had been there before. We found some great icicles on the snowy walk down and the treacherous invisible boggy holes were just as fun as usual.
The trip down from top sink was nice - remembering bits of the way made it seem much shorter than last time as I was no longer blindly chasing Tanguy. We soon got to Nagasaki chamber, a large hall floored with big boulders, and climbed the ironically named fairy steps. The fairy steps set the scene for several bits of Ease Gill, consisting of slightly sketchy/exposed muddy climbs. After another semi-awkward climb in a rift we arrived at Easter Grotto – an amazing chamber with many, many stalactites and columns. David and I decided to continue through the chamber until the red tape ran out – fyi, the stal just gradually gets less dense and bigger before ending with a single thick stubby column. In the meantime, Rhys was setting up his array of flashes, missing the incredible pun opportunity that could have been “Flash me.” I held the one at the back whilst lying down and trying not to knock the ceiling. Eventually we finished the modelling session and we descended down a muddy rope into another chamber.

From here onwards, we took the high level route to stop pot, which involved climbing up and down boulders for quite a while. At stop pot we climbed the ladder and there followed some more walking through large boulder-filled chambers with muddy floors. We reached the minarets (a passage with a kremlin-style cross-section) and took some more photos. Shortly after we reached stake pot. We had a break and decided to split up. Me, Tanguy, David and Jack would continue to Mistral, and Ryan, Diss and Rhys would head out of Lancaster hole. It was at this point that I realised the reality of the length of a 10 hour trip – we had already done almost all of the route from Top to Lanc that we did with Tanguy on Easter [ed - Winter] tour and there were another 4 hours to go.

The route from here onwards was new, and challenging in sections. I can’t quite remember the order of all the bits that came next, but here they are: The first section of the route to mistral was initially easy, with some more muddy crawling like before and a part with an obscure™ gap behind a boulder. There was one section with two ways to go, involving a squeeze lying on your side or an ‘easy 3m free climb’. Tanguy and Jack decided they liked the word easy, whereas David decided to try the squeeze. He got stuck and I pulled him out. Whilst he was walking over to the climb, I managed to squeeze through – success! Later we arrived at the 88ft pitch, which is a really nice open vertical chamber with small waterfall that is not flowing down where the rope is. At the bottom I think there was quite a nice rift as well. The worm way was particularly characteristic, with a fairly long mix of stooping and hands and knees crawling in a shallow stream way with very fresh mud on the walls. Parts of this were less fun but they provided a good introduction the wet crawls which would come later. We arrived at dusty junction, which was not very dusty. Hilton hall under link pot was impressive and a relief from stooping with some large floor to ceiling cairns “idiot stones” that looked like they needed some druids to accompany them. A particularly obscure™ crack in the wall (we didn’t notice it the first time and it didn’t even look like it led anywhere) led to a short climb into a small standing height chamber.

Somewhere around here there was also a wobbly ladder, held in place with ropes although that may have been later.

Now began the wet wallows and the muddy wallows. The wet wallows were a grim crawl that gradually got narrower and narrower until the passage just disappeared through a small just-about-person-sized section in some water, with a slightly raised section in the middle that could fit a head. On approaching this, my first thought was that this did not look like the way on, it looked more like a duck than a crawl. This section was especially unpleasant, requiring you to dip the side of your face in the water to get through. Having got through the 2m of cold squeezing and out into the wider section, I heard the one thing I did not want to hear from behind me – “can you come back through and help me?” Do I have to? I slowly turned around and started reluctantly going back into the crawly section, hoping that David would find his own way through in the time it took for me to get back to the worst bit. David’s method of getting through the wet wallows seemed to be by shouting very loudly at them however I was grateful this worked as the alternative of actually pulling him out would have been much worse. In between the wet and muddy wallows there was another wet crawl which although less narrow was wetter than before on account of having shoulder deep (whilst lying down) water. I think this section should have been named The Horse Trough. The muddy wallows were just a gravelly version of the wet ones, and a bit wider. Eventually we reached the final climb out of mistral, a few hours after splitting up at Stake Pot. I had not anticipated how long the trip would be, and it provided plenty of caving (8 ½ hours!). The walk back to the bull pot farm was fairly grim in the wind and snow. A bit of an epic, and I would do this again, although it was definitely not sold as such in the morning.

####James ‘Jimmy Dubz’ Wilson



##Sunday

On Sunday we arrived at Alum Pot (north flank of Ingleborough) on another cold, rainy and snowy day. Our groups decided to split off (with Rhys and Tanguy heading to another cave nearby). We entered in Long Churn crawling along a stream followed by a ~3 meter free climb until we arrived at the SRT area. After rappelling down the flat underground face, we popped out half way down the Alum Pot main shaft which was open to the surface. The area had some amazing views and lighting which made for some great photography. After rappelling and traversing across the main shaft, we arrived at an SRT zone rigged below a large, leaning boulder.  While the positioning of the set-up made it challenging to rappel (involving swinging out below the boulder), everyone made it to the bottom of the shaft in good time. The shaft continued on lower into the cave, but we decided against going any further due to time constraints. Overall the experience within the cave was one of my best ones to date and I would highly recommend it to those looking to take in some amazing views and gain some SRT experience.

####Ryan

The muscles around my shoulder blades ached abominably on Sunday morning. The day before options around Alum Pot were discussed and seeing as everybody was up for caving again I looked for neighbouring caves I hadn’t visited before. Washfold was one such, and the description from NFTFH had a conspicuous dearth of superlatives such as ‘very tight’ or ‘extremely wet’. Instead, and Washfold is probably the unique cave described there as ‘uncomplicated’. That was good enough for me…

Rhys thought he’d come with me since Jack led the luminous Alum group so we drove off towards Selside farm, where Herr Konduktor parked first in the middle of a deep puddle and second onto a soft muddy verge, sputtering to a halt as he lost the traction. Again, that was good enough for me.

Outside, the wind was howling and there was moisture in the cold air. Once changed, and therefore invicible, Rhys and I walked up the hill, past the Long Churn entrances and along the top of the scar to the north where Washfold was. With the use of GPS, the entrance was quickly located. It was a fenced off little shakehole, not far from the stone walls. Underneath our feet, several holes led down to a small stream passage.

Tucking the GPS under a tuft of grass in a tupperware box, we adjusted our bags, SRT kits packed inside and climbed down to the stream, which we followed to a large calcite obstruction where the passage  turns 180° to the left. We had to climb up to the roof bedding plane, squeeze through the opening and climb back down the steps of the calcite flowstone to the enlarging streamway. 

I then carried down at stream level for another downclimb, mostly using friction against the scalloped passage walls to land on a churning pool of water. A white jet of water sprayed the darkness beyond, falling with a deep, thunderous rumble. This I then assumed was the large, first pitch, and Rhys, looking ahead from a higher level of the rift spotted the traverse bolts.

I clambered back up to the ledge where he sat and we put our SRT kit on. The first anchor was a rusty D-ring type, but we couldn’t see any other artificial anchors for the traverse continuation. There was a large rock bollard 3 metres in the rift at roof level, so securing the rope to the ring, I dived in, wrapped a sling around the natural, rounded the corner and then saw the DMM anchors, protruding from the roof. At the far end, in a little alcove overlooking the 40m drop, were the bolts for the Y-hang. Once rigged, I abseiled slowly, looking for the deviation anchors that would provide a drier descent, found them, and whizzed down. It was more than good enough!

At the base of the pitch, the draught and chill were palpable, so I walked downstream for ten metres, waiting for Rhys to join me and carry on the exploration. He was soon down. We were both enjoying the moment, the new cave, the simplicity of the pitch, Yorkshire caving at its best! Further downstream, the stream passage gave way to a decorated rift, with ‘memorable’ climbs down angular flakes. Thankfully, there was a rope for the first 11m climb down, which we descended, but the next was unprotected and we were not happy with going down freestyle or otherwise. I carried on traversing for a little while at a well decorated level, marked by an undercut beneath the rift walls where a grey and ochre mud formation had weathered more rapidly than the surrounding limestone. Many other caves have this ‘stratum’ : Little Hull, at the bottom of the big pitch sprang to mind, Easegill too, just above the level of Main Drain.

The way out was relatively uneventful, that is, until the very last climb out of the cave where, losing my footing as I was passing a bag up to a ledge, I slipped down to stream level (2m below). I was unhurt: Rhys had quickly sprang into action and spotted me, but there was an easier way up which he scouted afterwards: the middle of the three holes leading to the stream. We vowed to return to Washfold, as it was a nice day out, but we’ll bring more ropes to protect the free-climbs and make our way to the sump. 

Outside, the world was turning white, as large snowflaked fell on the moors, blanketing the flanks of Ingleborough. Arriving at Long Churn entrances, we quickly sought the relative warmth of the cave, where we picked up Diss before making a break for the minibus. There we had great fun watching a novice caver struggle with wellies for twenty minutes, then with their central maillon and finally with their oversuit. Much to our amusement, their mentor jumped out of the car and yanked the oversuit by the collar with one brisk move, as if they were skinning a rabbit. 

In time, the rest of the Alum team emerged from the mists, followed by a couple of hikers who asked for a lift back to Ingleton, we agreed, having two spare seats left and drove back in time for tea and medals, or rather reheated but ever more scrumptious risotto.

####Tanguy
