Title: Yorks V 
Date: 2005-06-24
Location: yorkshire
Summary: Hardcore trip to Yorkshire with the Clew-mobile. Successful Rift / Large (Marble Steps) exchange... just.<br>GI Jo + The Clewster zoomed down the rather inaptly/ineptly namedLarge, appearing out of the tiny slot in the main Rift chamber just asTall + Deep prepared to leave at their allotted fail safe time, aftera romantic candlelit dinner. Jo &amp; Co zoomed out Rift into a cloud of midges, slow taxing escape from Large was rather more sordid - bursting into the moonlight at 23:20, absolutely caked in mud...<br><br>Sunday saw Jo rig Jingling by throwing Maillons down the pitch, and an obscene quantity of both Tea and Gear bought from Bernie's in order to equip the summer expedition.<br><a href="/caving/old/yorkshire/yorkshire-2005-06-24.php">Trip Report</a>, <a href="/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various/dirindex.html">Photos</a>.</br></br></br></br></p>
Type: trip
Photoarchive: /rcc/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various/
Mainimg: Jarvist-IMG_1557.JPG
Thumbl: Jarvist-IMG_1561--thumb.jpg
Thumbr: Jarvist-IMG_1559--thumb.jpg
Authors: Sandeep Mavadia, Jarvist Frost, Jo King
Cavepeeps: DATE=2005-06-25; CAVE=Rift Pot > Large Pot; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, Sandeep Mavadia;
	   DATE=2005-06-25; CAVE=Large Pot > Rift Pot; PEOPLE=Clewin Griffiths, Jo King;
	   DATE=2005-06-26; CAVE=Jingling Pot; PEOPLE=Clewin Griffiths, Jo King;
Oldurl:/caving/yorkshire/yorkshire-2005-06-24.php

{{ mainimg }}

### Clewin Griffith, Sandeep Mavadia, Joanna King and Jarvist Frost

## Saturday

### Large -&gt; Rift (Marble Steps): Clew &amp; Jo

### Rift -&gt; Large: Tall &amp; Deep [Trip Slogan: The Putrid Perversions]

[ ![A photo](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1549--thumb.jpg)
](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1549.html) Walking due west from the entrance to Large, we soon
came upon the Rift shakehole, with a clear cave entrance covered by anti-sheep
wooden props. Entrance scramble was decidedly loose; nudged a largish boulder
just before the shored pitch - flew straight to the bottom. Scaffold to P-Bolt
traverse, followed by straight drop past rotten shoring. In chamber, obvious
crawl way on takes one along chest-dipping static pooled rift, a few easy
2-3clambers, and a bit of blasted passage that pops out onto two climbs just
before the pitches start again (attempt feet first, backwards scramble with
tackle + srt sacs was awkward!). At the top of the pitch, an enormous
profusion of P-hangers &amp; bolts are found. Nice drop of ~12m onto large
ledge, with choice of direct Y-hang off ledge, or tensioned traverse around to
the right, followed by a Y-hang rigged from the opposite wall. ~15m below is a
Y-hang rebelay, easier to rig if long armed :) Smooth drop down, suddenly
popping into side of large chamber. Just rigged with 60m &amp; tight alpine
butterflies.

Large cavern pretty impressive, way through to Large is by a bedding plane
slot in the SE corner of the cavern, a scramble down and then up boulders from
where the rope lands.

[ ![A photo](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1554--thumb.jpg)
](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1554.html) Time was tight - 4:25 with a failsafe turn-back time
of 4:30. Briefly looked at bedding plane but dismissed it as too wretched, so
decided to enjoy a delightful candlelit dinner with Sandeep - bourban
biscuits, creme eggs and apple juice. Amazingly, though the SRT-sac
transported Tetra Brik of juice was truly spherical, and had the consistency
of a saggy plastic bag, not a drop of juice was spilt. Incidentally, the teeth
of a Croll make great strike-paper for non-safety matches!

[ ![A photo](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1560--thumb.jpg)
](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1560.html)
Desperate not to have to go back via Large, Clew &amp;
Jo flew out of the slot and down to the feast. They looked particularly
wretched; mud everywhere. Seemed that the Large exit was going to be fairly
exciting!

[ ![A photo](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1559--thumb.jpg)
](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1559.html)
After plenty of faff and biscuits; during which Clewin
attempted to construct a replacement Croll out of two bootlaces and Jo's
hairclip, Deep &amp; I started along the bedding plane.

[ ![A photo](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1561--thumb.jpg)
](/caving/photo_archive/trips/2005-06-24%20-%20yorkshire%20-%20various
/Jarvist-IMG_1561.html)
Passage beyond pleasent and large, beautiful stal.
Coming upon a 1-2m diameter static pool, way on was via bouldering through a
small side passage on the left that continued in the general direction of the
main chamber, which otherwise ends at a unpassable squeeze. While attempting
the squeeze, with my legs rather wedged, a sizeable lump of the cave plopped
off the wall and landed on my thigh; Hmm - maybe this wasn't the way forward?

Muddy wallow was truly dire, surface water over ~0.5m deep clay-mud. My nose
made a great plough as I crawled through. In the small chamber beyond, we
found the guidebook left by Jo and looked for the way on.

Following the directions, backwards, was rather difficult - places were always
described as 'you now find yourself in so-and-so chamber' with no description
of how you enter it, or what it looks like from the other side! Two choices
were a tight ceiling bedding plane, and a lower squeeze/passage. Both
drafting, both with recent SRT-equip scratch marks in the mud, both in roughly
the right compass direction.

Initially trying the bedding plane crawl, found it too tight for my chest,
carefully reversing out on the out-breaths while my (closed) knife dug rather
deep into the old sternam. Sandeep tried, got wedged with his hips. Decided to
try the crawl - Sandeep got stuck for a far while on the right-hand corner
about 3m in. Escape made by judicial pulling of the ol' wellies. I tried,
happily zipping round the corner and on another few metres. In a region where
one could just about turn around, draft sucked through what looked like a
just-doable squeeze, but whose mud seemed distinctly untouched - still in
those odd cauliflower-like florets rather than smooth, slid over clumps. An
exit was sort.

Getting out of the right-hand bend was rather more exciting fighting gravity;
it sort of forces your back to adopt a cork-screw configuration as you
desperately try and make your legs bend backwards while attempting to get your
shoulder over a step. After what seemed like a good 20minutes of increasingly
desperate attempts, my back made a distinctly exciting popping sound; with
that odd adrenalin rush of impending pain, I took stock of the situation and
decided that cave conservation be damned, I was getting out even if I had to
bring the roof down. Managed to slither back, and get my hands under the rock
'step' that my shoulder was struggling to get over; in a moment of sheer
anger, I wrenched this paving-slab like segment out of the mud and shunted it
ahead of me. Escape was compartively easy, it should be much easier now for
future lost cavers!

We were at -100 in a 101m deep cave; it was now 7pm (we had been in the small
chamber the Large-side of the wallow for an hour trying the squeezes) - with
Clewin expecting us out at 9pm, speed was rather of the essence! After some
struggling, managed to open the first-aid kit using slings as a chain-wrench
to fight the slippery mud, a few Ibuprofens were duly gobled. With careful
wriggling and breathing, the bedding plane was passed. Way on is continuing
along similar passageway, open chamber to the right and associated boulder
climbs are compartively unworn. Passageway is part crawl / part slither,
followed by a small climb down into an obvious boulder choke and ~20m of choke
until you pop out into a large chamber - Necropolis.

Skipping painfully along the chamber, a rope was eventually come upon -
Colossus. Beautiful (but drippy) pitch over white-clay formations. Waiting as
Deep prussicked, I sat on a rope sac with my eyes closed - when I tried to
open my eyes again, I found my eyelashes stuck together by dried mud - pretty
disgusting!

Navigation pretty dodge; descriptions in guide book (Selected Caves) were
rather unhelpful and sometimes misleading, junctions were well described but
distances + nature of passages were less clear. Infinitely better than nothing
though! I must have consumed a fair amount of clay, in between licking the
pages clean so I could read, and sucking the mud off the face of my watch +
compass - a level of depravity that I'm none too keen to return to!

Navigation once beyond the otherside of the Pit was relatively
straightforward, but time was very tight - no resting whatsover, except for
occasional stop to repair the smashed battery case on my MigLight. Rift climbs
were very tight and difficult to complete when so lubricated with mud.
Finally, the entrance pitch series was reached, with a rather worried Clew
shouting down the pitch at 11pm as Sandeep negotiated the last squeeze and I
attempted the awkward spanner-reaching-between-the-legs derig. _Just_ in time
to prevent a rather embarrasing second rescue in one year!

It was only once back at the farm that I saw how muddy I was - my face was one
grey slab, with a thin red line at the join of my lips and blue eyes staring
back from the mirror. My hair was grey, with cemented rat-tails around my face
where I had tried to pull it back from my face.

An impressive cave; but inbetween navigating mostly blind, a frightfully tight
callout and injury - probably the most stressful, grim and painful 5 hours of
my life! But hey, Epic trips are certainly the most memorable!

In between the painful prussick, disorientated dangles while derigging and
sheer depravity of the mud; I vowed to never go caving never no more - two
days later I'm already thinking of going back, though I'm not sure whether its
because I want to have a chance to enjoy the cave properly myself, or merely
force other people through the same depraved experience!

####Jarvist Frost

_And alternative perspective on the same trip from Sandeep..._

Assured that the Rift-Large exchange is an excellent trip on the previous
Tuesday we headed up Marble Steps to find the entrances, Clew and the GI
heading into Large and Jarv and I into Rift. The few steps down and the
entrance pitch was negotiated with ease, the crawl wasn.t so easy especially
with a tackle sack but it was all fun.

Next came a 20m pitch down onto a large ledge. This is where I saw Jarv rig a
free hanging traverse round the corner between P-hangers 1˝ m apart using his
mutant go-go-gadget arms while I took photos. This impeccable rigging
descended onto a free hanging rebelay but with much swearing I was free of my
short cows and descending again. It was a beautiful 30m abseil landing in a
large chamber filled with boulder choke. Even though we had gone only a couple
of hundred metres it had taken us 3hours.

After having a snoop around the neighbourhood for the way on it was 5 minutes
from the fail safe turn around time, when Clew and GI shot out of some grotty
hole in the side of the wall caked in mud form head to toe. I knew that the
exit wasn.t going to be pleasant but that would be after our candlelight
lunch. I produce a packet of bourbon biscuits that I had stolen form the car
while the others changed and Jarv opened the apple juice that had somehow not
exploded but lost all form.

After agreeing with Clewin that we should change the callout time to 10pm
rather than 9, we headed through the crawl to a chamber where there were many
pretty stals to take pictures with but we only took one because we knew time
was going to be tight as it was. After the end of this chamber and a few
crawls later we ended up at the passage that sumped in bad weather. Mud,
glorious mud, was in store and this was just the beginning with 20cm of water
on top of a further 50cm of, quicksand style, mud which had to be negotiated
on all fours, none of which came clear of the mud until we emerged on the
other side. This is where we found the copy of Selected Caves Guide left there
by the GI and Clew.

A few steps on was the chamber that we ended up spending an hour in, squeezing
and destroying backs. There were two exits out of this chamber, one higher up
in the ceiling and the other in floor. The one in the floor looked slightly
bigger from the outset so I headed down that, after one preliminary attempt we
had another look around the chamber for a way on but these two were the only
real options. So I dived back into the small hole in the ground, got around
the dog leg and spyed a small crawl. I could have just got through if I didn.t
care about getting out but I wasn.t there, yet. I tried to get out but this
was easier said than done, I got back as far as I could with the aid of some
welly yanking from Jarv but whatever I did past that point it felt like I
hitting my head against a brick wall, unfortunately, it was probably a rock
wall. Then, as was always going to happen, I got my helmet totally wedged and
had to take it off before turning round and emerging superman stylee. Next was
Jarv.s turn, thanks to more mutantism, he got a few more metres than me before
deciding to return. Although, this wasn.t going to be as easy my exit, after
much grunting and groaning he decided the only way he was going to get out was
by dismantling the cave from the inside out, pushing a paving slab shaped rock
out of the way, finally, getting out after finding some purchase by holding my
hand. However, while doing this, apparently audibly, his back popped, perhaps
a remnant of our little Christmas adventure. This meant more drugs for Jarv
and the depressing acceptance of having to crawl the other way.

More crawling, until the next time we could stand up, Jarv explored a few
leads, I had a piss. Yet more crawling, and we finally got into the
Necropolis, a giant chamber, with a rope, securely fastened at the far end.
Jarv was getting worried about the time as was I so he told me to keep going
at the top as he would be a while derigging. Once off the pitch head I started
exploring, seeing some truly pristine Gower pools in one direction I decided
to leave them unperturbed. In another direction was a junction I had a look
round but had to ask Jarv when he had got up and finished recovering from the
pain of a broken back. He duly consulted the guide book and decided we were at
Calcite Crawl so we headed on.

I went on first with the tackle sack and this experience I can only describe
as horrific. The rift was just wide enough for the tackle sack; thankfully I
was slightly slimmer than this but the oh-so sticky mud made it even worse.
When it came to climbs it seemed as though gravity trebled. At some point I
handed the tackle sack back over to Jarv so he could enjoy it. This rift felt
like it went on forever until we got to the end and the entrance pitch series.
By this time it had gone 11 and I thought I would probably emerge to see Simon
(the guy with pocket dragon who found us at Christmas) with a big grin on his
face and a suitably sarcastic comment. This meant I didn.t pay much attention
to my surroundings until I got stuck, yet again, by the tackle sack which had
returned like an albatross around my neck. A final burst of extreme swearing
got me free and to the bottom of the very last pitch. At this point, an almost
angelic, .heyaaaa.. Came wafting down from the surface. It was infact, Clewin
and Jo, wondering if they should call the rescue but thankfully it was not to
be. Once out, Jo decided she couldn.t keep the laughter in and split into
hysterics as she saw both out faces covered in mud, it was only when we got
back to the farm that we discovered its extent.

An experience NEVER to be repeated, well not by me anyway, I.ll push another
first year down that wretched hole in 12 months though, no doubt.

####Deep

* * *

## Sunday

### Jingling: Clew &amp; Jo

Having deposited Sandeep and Jarv at Bernies for some hard core bumming [Ed: I
resent that insinuation], Clewin and myself set off sprightly for Jingling.
Well ok, maybe sluggishly is a more accurate word. The aches and bruises from
the day before and the alluring thought of tea and flapjack distracted us
slightly from the prospective delights of caving. However, resisted Bernies we
did, and drove off to the Jingling parking spot. Here the ICCC faffing ability
was truly outdone by a nearby carload of MUCC. Unchanged on our arrival, they
had just about managed to get into furries by the time Clew and I were
dressed, packed and half way up the hill.

Clew started off by rigging the tree and swinging across to the cleft. I
followed him down and after swinging round anywhere and everywhere I
eventually clung to a bit of rock vaguely in the right vicinity, Clew hauled
me round the corner and we did a little acrobatic swapping of places. Our
apparent speediness stopped the moment I started rigging. Clewin had the
patience of a ..erm patient thing. (can.t think of the metaphor) as he watched
me create networks of tangles and then proudly produce midget alpine
butterflies which would span the space of about 2 inches. I listened to his
helpful advice such as "don't throw the maillons down the pitch". and,
deciding that I needed to learn from my own mistakes, promptly dropped them.
Thankfully Clew had a couple spare which allowed me to retrieve the feisty
creatures and continue on down.

We managed to get about three-quarters of the way down before I realised that
Jingling Pot is actually in a time warp. I.d been happily knotting away for
half an hour of Jingling -Jo-time when in actual fact 2 hours had passed on
the surface. We turned back and with Clewin derigging we left at a rather
speedier rate of knots (ha what a clever play on words). On exit we exclaimed
joyously at the inevitable midge attack, and jetted off back to Ingleton to
collect the Bernies Bummers.

####Joanna King

### Bernie's: Tall &amp; Deep

World Class faff.

  

####Jarvist Frost

* * *

