Title: Devon 
Date: 2006-06-09
Location: devon
Summary: Our last minibus-full trip of the year was an absolutely lovely jaunt down to Devon. Caves were short but great muddy fun, ideal BBQ weather and a pleasent campsite up on a hill above a beautiful abbey. Also truly the Mecca of cream teas.<br>Why can't it always be June?
Type: trip
Photoarchive: 
Mainimg: IMGP0283.JPG
Thumbl:IMGP0294--thumb.jpg
Thumbr:IMGP0279--thumb.jpg
Authors: Jarvist Frost, Marc Labuhn, Sandeep Mavadia, Rik Venn
Cavepeeps: DATE=2006-06-10; CAVE=Pridhamsleigh Cavern; PEOPLE=Sandeep Mavadia, Gerardo Ocana-Fuentes, Sammy, Hannah, Quiet Tim, Jay;
      DATE=2006-06-10; CAVE=Afton Red Rift; PEOPLE=Jarvist Frost, Marc Labuhn, Rik Venn, Sarah;
      DATE=2006-06-11; CAVE=Dog Hole; PEOPLE=Marc Labuhn, Rik Venn, Sarah;
      DATE=2006-06-11; CAVE=Pridhamsleigh Cavern; PEOPLE=Marc Labuhn, Rik Venn, Sarah;
      NOCAVE=Shed, Janet Cotter;
Oldurl:/caving/devon/devon-2006-06-09.php
Status:published

{{ mainimg }}

## Saturday

### Pridhamsleigh: Quiet Tim, Sam &amp; Hannah, Deep, Jay and Gerardo

A beautiful day did not deter the hardcore of ICCC freshers eager to get
muddier than they had ever been, Pridhamsleigh was chosen and the six of us
were dropped off at the entrance before the minibus sped off to Afton Red
Rift. Tim had been here before so finding the entrance was trivial even if his
last visit was 7 years ago, a quick snap and we were underground. The
encounter with the mud was almost immediate and utterly liberating as wrists
and knees disappeared below the surface and returned in a very familiar brown
colour, lubricating the short boughts of crawling.  
  
We headed on into this maze like cave, the perfect place to play underground
hide and seek, and explored every single lead we could find often ending up in
blind crawls which had to accessed by mudslide. At one point I was coaxed out
of a section of rift in the floor by a harmonious rendition of Help by The
Beatles.  
  
We decided that was enough monkeying about and we were going to make a
consorted effort to find the elusive underground lake; we headed down an as
yet unexplored passage, which after a few greasy climbs turned into a
streamway. Progress, you might think, but this streamway kept getting deeper
and deeper as the shrieks from the girls came echoing backwards as the water
passed levels 1, 2 &amp; 3!* I went forward to investigate, and found Sam and
Hannah wading up to their armpits in cold water, this wasn't ideal to say the
least so I hoisted Sam up into the rift and sent Hannah back to find refuge.
This definitely wasn't the way that we were meant to be going so we turned
back.  
  
After a few minutes, Jay caught sight of a solo caver tried to follow him to
ask for directions, it turned out that he was a diver and was planning to dive
the underground lake, alas some of his equipment wasn't working as it should
so he had to retreat.  
  
We exited in just 10 minutes confused with how it took us 2 hours to find the
underground lake. This was a fun fresher cave, something to get new cavers
into the sport.  
  
  
* Level 1 - wet feet, Level 2 - crotch, Level 3 - nipples, level 4 - sump diving time! 

####Deep

### Afton Red Rift: Jarvist, Marc, Rik &amp; Sarah

After a bit of excitement finding the damn cave - scrambling over some random
scrub-land looking for a cliff-like entrance, the rather warm rift was
entered. It was incredibly slippery - lubricated with a rather greasy feeling
bright red mud. Not the most fresher friendly place in the world to be, but
Marc coped amiably. Breaking out into 'Flower Chamber', a well deserved rest
&amp; strip was enjoyed, it was truly sweltering underground! The formations
were less than impressive - clumps of 'popcorn', the red colour lost below the
coating of mud.

Met up with the guys from Reading in 'Cascade Chamber' - which was indeed as
impressive as the name implies. The Reading Crew (with a rather pleasent A3
survey!) zoomed out to go cliff-diving, leaving us to attempt the roundtrip.
After a bit of confusion with the selected-caves survey indicating non-
bisecting passages where a crossroads was found, we found ourselves in Mud
Hall. What we thought was the way on was a suicidal climb in the roof; after
looking at other possibilities we reversed our steps and headed out the way we
came in. Speaking to someone (I forget who) later, the way on was apparently
in the floor.

####Jarvist Frost [G+](https://plus.google.com/103383171386197915463?rel=author)

I was very pleased to find that a complete misfit like myself seemed to fit in
so well that I felt like an old lag on my very first trip, and was mistaken
for one by several people there.

The caving itself was a lot of fun, and I was surprised how different the
three caves I visited were, and how different again they were from a cave I
had been to in Derbyshire. I felt very elated, and exhausted, after
negotiating the many traverses and climbs in Afton Red Rift, with plenty of
help from the rest of team keen (Jarv, Rick &amp; Sarah).

There was plenty of fun to be had outside of getting hot, bruised and muddy,
too. Camping in a field in the middle of Devon, having BBQs, skinny-dipping in
the river Dart and much more were almost enough to make me forget that I was
still in England.

If there is a downside, it is that I will now have to wait until October until
the next trip.

####Marc Labuhn

### BBQ by the River Dart:

Joining us in a non-caving fashion for the weekend was The Shed, Em &amp;
Janet. During the day they had scouted out, with Janet's local knowledge, a
fantastic spot for the BBQ. Just by the banks of the 'no agricultural run-off
or pollution along its entire length' and extremely swimmable River Dart, with
a minibus sized carpark and Scotish Highland cattle grazing around the local
pushes. Shed had boules with him - but no jack, so many games were played with
a shallot. In case Lyndon asks, we most definitely did not build a pyramid
camp-fire on top of his beautiful chrome BBQ.

Skinny-dipping by dark in the Dart (the waterproof nature of the FX3 was a
definite bonus), extinguishing the BBQ coals and then a rather exciting drive
over super-narrow one-lane bridges with the tee-total but not so experience
'bus driver Jarv. A lovely end to a day of caving. Why isn't it always June in
this country?

####Jarvist Frost

## Sunday

### Dog Hole &amp; Prid: Rik, Marc &amp; Sarah

Team keen, consisting of Sarah, Mark and myself set off on Sunday's only
caving jaunt. Meanwhile the others went off to drink cream teas, give
confession at the local Abbey and cuddle some otters at the local wildlife
sanctuary. We got the key for a cave called dog hole, which is right next to
Pridhamsleigh.

Much like the other caves in Devon, dog was very muddy and consequently
slippery. We set off with the intention of quickly reaching the main chamber,
then opening the gate to the pretties which lie beyond. Upon looking at the
gate, it was decided that it was probably some sort of trick as we couldn't
see anywhere to put the key. A farce ensued, as we attempted to find another
gate-type thing elsewhere in the cave.

There was a moment of excitement when I got a bit stuck coming back through a
fairly involved uphill squeeze leading out of a chamber with a couple of digs.
Luckily Mark was close at hand to take my helmet and battery belt through
before helping me get out. After that little trauma, I also performed a very
schonky, slippery climb involving use of a sling foothold and a fair few
meters above the ground. Unfortunately there was nothing up there and
eventually we realised that we had to investigate the unlikely metal plate
we'd discovered earlier.

Mark discovered the padlock, which was behind the plate and proceeded to
attempt to open it. Obviously, such an awkwardly placed lock in such a muddy
cave had long since become completely filled with mud and stuck. We all had
two attempts at opening the lock before giving up and going for a bimble round
nearby Priddam's Leigh.

Pridhamsleigh was a bit more complicated to navigate and I lost the other two
briefly when I went up to ask directions to the underground lake from a local
chap guiding a tourist trip. Luckily, the two routes we took re-converged
after not very long and we managed to find each other. We stormed onward to a
drippy climb down which looked like the way on. However, it was getting rather
late so we decided to retreat back to the van. We had ample time for a dip in
the nearby stream before getting changed and going for a tasty kebab. A fine
few hours worth of caving were had by all, even if we didn't get to see what
lay on the other side of that mysterious gate in dog hole or even the lake in
Pridhamsleigh.

####Rik Venn

