Title: Migovec
Date: 2001-07-13
Location: Slovenia
Summary:
Photoarchive: photo_archive/slovenia/2001/
Type: expedition
Authors:

<h2>surveys resulting from 2001 expedition</h2>

 <h3>Gardeners' World</h3>
 <ul>
     <li>English
     	<ul>
	 	<li><a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2001/Gworld2001_en.png" > picture (.png) 52k</a></li>
		<li><a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2001/Gworld2001_en.pdf">High Quality PDF (208k)</a></li>
	</ul>
     </li>
     <li>Slovensko
     	<ul>
	 	<li><a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2001/Gworld2001_sl.png" >picture (.png) 136k</a></li>
		<li><a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2001/Gworld2001_sl.pdf">High Quality PDF (404k)</a></li>
	</ul>
     </li>
 </ul>
 <applet code="caverot.class" archive="/caving/caverot/caverot.jar" name="caverot" width="300" height="300">
<param name="cave" value="http://www.su.ic.ac.uk/caving/report/Gardeners_World.3dz">
</applet>

 <h3>Royston Vasey</h3>
 <ul>
	 <li><a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2001/RoystonVasey2001.png" > picture (.png) 17k</a></li>
	<li><a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2001/RoystonVasey2001.pdf">High Quality PDF (88k)</a></li>
</ul>

<h2>summer expedition 2001</h2>
 <h3>summary</h3>
<p>Another successful expedition. The focus this year was on exploring
Gardeners' World cave which is turning out to be quite substantial. The cave
is now 575m deep, and we have doubled the length to almost 1.7km. A long
phreatic passageway (Friendship Gallery) now takes the cave under the
system, and there is a possibility of a connection with M16 around the
Northern line.</p>

<h3>hunger series</h3>
<p> A number of passageways were discovered off Jelly Chamber leading
to quite a bit of vertical cave development (Hunger series, Judge Dredd).  </p>

<h3>at the bottom</h3>
<p>The going lead at the bottom of the cave (Zlatarog rift) lead immediately
to an open pitch (Fistful of Tolars) which was dropped 40m. At the
bottom of the pitch two leads were found. The first, a small trickle
lead down a further 8m pitch which dripped into a small streamway
(Banzai streamway). This winds its way along a further 20m or so to
an undescended pitch-head/possible traverse.</p>

<p>The second lead at the bottom of Fistful of Tolars drops down several
small pitches followed by Zimmer, a 50m drop. From this point down, the cave changes
dramatically. Up a small climb off the bottom of Zimmer was found
a horizontal phreatic passageway some 3 metres in height leading off into the
distance (Friendship Gallery).</p>

<p>A swing on to a ledge near the bottom of Zimmer lead to a climb up
a small waterfall which in turn lead to a passageway littered with rock
and which continues for 20 metres until it reaches an undescended pitch.</p>

<h3>friendship gallery</h3>
<p>Going down Friendship Gallery, there is a junction off to the left which
starts as a muddy climb but quickly turns into clean washed limestone
as a stream enters and drops down a rift (Falls Road). This seems to
lead under Friendship Gallery.</p>

<p>Friendship Gallery itself, the muddy phreatic passage, continues in
the same way for a couple of hundred metres. There are a few
slippery climbs to negotiate, but progress is quick. Exploration was
left at a very muddy pitch-head, which takes a howling, freezing
draught.</p>


<h3>royston vasey (a local cave for local people)</h3>
<p>A new cave entrance was discovered not 30m from the top level
bivouac. It was pushed to a depth of 30m. A find so close to the
camp shows how rich in caving the area is.</p>

<h3>Future Exploration</h3>

<p>There are a large number of unexplored leads in Gardeners' World cave
which definitely merit future exploration. It is worth mentioning that
the depth at the end of Friedship Gallery is -570m, so additional
exploration would probably require an underground camp to be
set up.</p>
