Title: Pivo Mož
Date: 2015-07-10
Location: Slovenia
Summary:
Photoarchive: photo_archive/slovenia/2015/
Type: expedition
Authors:

#Tolminski Migovec Cave Exploration
#July 10th – August 16th 2015

##2015 Findings and Report

<a href="/caving/FILES/expeditions/slovenia/slov2015/PivoMozExpeditionReport.pdf">2015 Expedition report</a>

Surveys still a WIP.

###Summary

The 20th ICCC to Migovec, North West Slovenia took place between July 10th and August 16th 2015. A total of 23 British cavers and 4 Slovenes contributed to the exploration of the cave system, which amounts to 2.2 km of additional passage below 600 m and several metres gained on surface digs. At 30.8 km, the Migovec-Vrtnarija system is now over a symbolic 30km long and this year’s expedition further confirms its position as longest in Slovenia.

For the first time in Migovec exploration two underground camps were operational at the same time: Camp X-Ray at -650 m, a 4 berth camp set up in a central position, and Camp Deep Core II at -850 m near Red Cow, a 2 berth camp set up by divers Jarvist Frost and Connor Roe for future use as access to the Watership Down sump, and used this year by them as a staging post for the northern extensions. Camp X-Ray remained the main exploration camp. All leads however are now more than 2.5 hours away, raising the possibility of setting up another camp, closer to the southern leads in Sic Semper Tyrannis.

Worn rope was replaced in a number of areas during the expedition. Most particularly, a couple of rebelays on Pico (- 200 m) and the ultimate hang on Zimmer (- 550 m) were replaced, and considerable rebolting & rerigging was done in the lower-level phreatic section between Big Rock and Colarado Sump, and the (hitherto unprotected) climbs up into Republica (- 800 m). We had six new cavers (who only started caving in 2014) on expedition this year. Five of them managed to camp at X-Ray, all of them contributing to the exploration, by either helping with setting up or dismantling the camp, and exploring new cave themselves. A sixth fresher helped the expedition objectives with exploring the surface leads
